                                        Why Larger Models Learn More: Effects of Capacity,
                                              Interference, and Rare-Task Retention


                                                           Jing Huang ,a Daniel Wurgaft ,a Rachit Bansalb Laura Ruisc
                                                               Naomi Saphrab David Alvarez-Melisb Andrew Lampinend
                                                                        Christopher Pottsa             Ekdeep Singh Lubana
arXiv:2605.29548v2 [cs.LG] 1 Jun 2026




                                                   a                            b                                                    c          d
                                                       Stanford University          Kempner Institute at Harvard University              MIT        Anthropic


                                                                                                   Abstract
                                                       Larger models learn tasks smaller models do not. What drives this phenomenon?
                                                       We develop a simple phenomenological argument that power-law scaling already
                                                       suggests that a larger model will be able to learn a part of the data distribution that a
                                                       smaller model fails to learn, even with infinite training data. To validate this claim
                                                       and identify its causes, we study the effects of model scaling on a synthetic setup
                                                       consisting of a mixture of tasks that show monotonic scaling curves. The results
                                                       point to a data-induced competition over resources (neurons). Specifically, smaller
                                                       models allocate their neurons to high frequency or low complexity tasks, and so
                                                       they learn solutions that perform poorly on rare and complex tasks. Moreover,
                                                       this happens even when solutions capable of expressing the desired task exist. We
                                                       then assess how a larger model circumvents this data-centric bottleneck, finding
                                                       that it traces to a reduced interference mechanism: larger models can allocate
                                                       enough resources to common tasks that the gradient updates for those tasks become
                                                       weak, which means that they do not overwrite rare-task features as they slowly
                                                       accumulate. Finally, to further validate these claims, we pretrain OLMo models
                                                       (4M to 4B parameters) on novel tasks of varying frequency and complexity. The
                                                       results mirror those from our synthetic data experiments: only the larger OLMo
                                                       models learn the infrequent and complex tasks, and these larger models embed
                                                       more task features in their representations and show less gradient interference
                                                       between tasks. Overall, we offer a data-centric account of why larger models learn
                                                       tasks that smaller models fail to. This helps explain why larger models are better in
                                                       practice, and it can inform practical questions concerning model sizing and training
                                                       data mixtures.

                                        1    Introduction
                                        Modern machine learning is celebrated for its massive generalist models, which are capable of
                                        handling arbitrary inputs in diverse and complex environments [1–10]. Based on the empirical finding
                                        that larger models often excel where smaller1 models show random-chance performance, prior work
                                        has claimed that the ability to solve certain critical tasks only emerges in larger models [11–19]. Such
                                        arguments have fueled the drive towards increased scaling. However, given the large training and
                                        inference costs that large models impose, it is worth identifying precisely what marginal benefits are
                                        unlocked by larger models and whether scaling parameters is the sole way of realizing those benefits.
                                        Our argument begins from the observation that power-law scaling [20–22] already suggests that
                                        there is a regime in which a smaller model fails to learn parts of a data mixture that a larger
                                        model succeeds on, even under asymptotic training (Fig. 1, Sec. 2). This suggests that larger
                                            1We   use the terms “larger” and “smaller” informally here but develop a precise relational definition of these terms in Sec. 2.
models enjoy a genuine advantage that may allow them to learn task distributions that smaller models
will inevitably fail to learn within the same training setup. Importantly, this is not an argument that
larger models are simply more sample efficient [18, 23–29], but rather that smaller models suffer
from a more fundamental limitation even under infinite training regimes.
To validate this prediction and identify its              Loss              Compute Optimal   Asymptotic       Scaling data / model

causes, we analyze a setting involving a mixture
of regression tasks. In this, we are inspired by
much recent work using toy tasks to pinpoint the
effects of scaling [30–40]. Furthermore, all of           LC (Ns)
                                                                    Learnable via
                                                                    data scaling
the individual tasks in our setting are learnable
by the models under consideration, capturing the          L∞ (Ns)                                          Learning requires
                                                                                                           model scaling

idea that tasks smaller models fail to learn can          LC (Nl)
still be instilled into them via post-training [41–
50]. Correspondingly, mere expressivity notions                                 Ns                                     Nl             # Params
are not the issue; instead, the question concerns     Figure 1: Learning a part of the distribution re-
the ability of these models to learn complex task     quires model scaling. Compare the loss curves for
distributions from data. These experiments lead       compute-optimal scaling with the one following
to two key findings, as described below.              an infinite resource regime (labeled asymptotic).
First, scaling enables learning rare and com-         The region labeled purple denotes the amount of
plex tasks (Sec. 3.1). Our experimental set-          loss both a smaller model with Ns parameters
ting defines controlled manipulations of task fre-    and a larger model with Nl parameters are able
quency and complexity. We present an analytic         to achieve with respect to a random baseline under
argument that only larger models will (on aver-       finite resources. We call loss reduction accessible
age) learn the rare and complex tasks present in      to the smaller model under infinite compute, but
this setting, and we verify this analysis experi-     that a larger model would get at in a more resource
mentally (Fig. 2).                                    efficient manner (i.e., under finite compute), learn-
                                                      able via data scaling. If there remains a part of
Second, reduced competition for resources             the loss that is achieved by the larger model un-
enables learning rare and complex tasks               der finite resources, but that a smaller model even
(Sec. 3.2). Here, we extend our formal anal-          under asymptotic data scaling is unable to reach,
ysis to show that, upon observation of samples        then we call this part learned via model scaling.
from a rare task, model parameters update, but        This part of the distribution is explained by a larger
only larger models, by virtue of having more          model by virtue of its larger size.
parameters and hence less gradient interference,
are able to retain memory of a previously observed batch of data from a rare task. Thus, when the
next batch of rare-task data comes in, the larger model builds on its prior knowledge, which ultimately
leads to success despite the impoverished learning signal. In contrast, the smaller model is forced
to start from scratch and consequently fails. We again verify these findings experimentally in our
regression setting (Figs. 3 and 4).
Finally, we validate the above theoretical arguments in real LLMs (Sec. 4). Specifically, we
pretrain OLMo models (4M to 4B parameters) on the Dolma v1.7 corpus with completely novel tasks
injected at controlled frequency. We find that only the larger OLMo models are able to learn the
infrequent and complex tasks (Sec. 4.2). Furthermore, these OLMo models mirror our toy-task models
in deeper ways: larger OLMo models have more task features embedded in their representations
(Sec. 4.3) and show less gradient interference (Sec. 4.4). Beyond supporting our theoretical claims,
these results can provide practical guidance to large-scale model training efforts.
Overall, the data-centric nature of our analysis suggests that understanding why larger models learn
more requires not only asking what they can represent, but also what is learnable under gradient-based
optimization from a given data mixture.

2   A Phenomenological Model Predicts Larger Models Learn More
Neural network scaling is known to predictably and monotonically improve loss [20, 28, 51]:
                                                     A       B
                                    L(N, D) = L0 +       + β,                                  (1)
                                                    Nα      D
where L0 denotes the irreducible loss, A, B are constants, and α, β are parameter / data exponents
(α ≈ 0.46 and β ≈ 0.51 for Chinchilla-scaling [28]). Training in a compute-optimal manner, i.e.,


                                                      2
finding the model size and data configuration that helps achieve the minimum loss at a given compute
budget C, gives us
                                           LC (N ) ∝ N −γ ,
where γ = 0.34, and LC (N ) denotes the optimum loss achieved when training a model with N
parameters under resource constraints. The relation shows larger models are expected to achieve
a smaller loss. However, resource-constrained training by itself does not inform what a model can
actually express. Specifically, even though a smaller model may have a worse compute-optimal loss,
we do not know if it is fundamentally incapable of achieving the same loss as the larger model. To
assess that statement, we must evaluate a model’s loss under asymptotic resources (i.e., infinite data):2
                                           L∞ (N ) ∝ N −α .
If α > γ, as is the case in practice, we again see gains from merely scaling the model size. That is,
the asymptotic loss achieved by a larger model is better than the smaller one. This indicates there
is a part of the training distribution a smaller model, despite observing infinite data, fails to learn.
Based on this phenomenological argument, we define the following.
Definition 1 (Learnable via data scaling). Consider a target model with Nl number of parameters
that we call “large”. We say a “smaller” model, i.e., for which parameter count Ns < Nl , can recover
the loss of a larger model via data scaling if LC (Ns ) − LC (Nl ) > 0, but L∞ (Ns ) − LC (Nl ) < 0.
Def. 1 thus captures the scenario put forward in Sec. 1. That is, the smaller model may in fact be just
undertrained: the larger model learns more sample efficiently and reduces loss faster, but a smaller
model can eventually catch up [18, 23–29]. Correspondingly, the marginal ability of a larger model
to explain the data distribution (i.e., the loss) can be recovered by a smaller model merely observing
more data. Nevertheless, there exist regimes where data scaling will not suffice, as described next.
Definition 2 (Learnable via model scaling). Consider a target model with Nl number of parameters
that we call “large”. For a small scalar value ϵ, we define Ns∗ (ϵ) as the largest “small” model if
L∞ (Ns∗ (ϵ)) − LC (Nl ) > ϵ. That is, even asymptotically, the smallest model never reaches the same
loss as the large model. Correspondingly, for a given model size N , we call it “small” if N < Ns∗ (ϵ)
and say recovering the loss of the larger model requires model scaling.
This latter scenario thus captures the case where, when two models with parameter counts Ns , Nl ,
with Ns < Nl , are trained, there is truly a marginal improvement for explaining the data that can be
attributed to the larger model having more parameters. This is the most interesting case that warrants
further study: what is it about the data that only a larger model can learn, such that the smaller model
cannot, even after observing infinite data? How precisely does having more parameters aid this
learning? We aim to answer these questions in the following sections.

3    Scaling Allows Learning Rare Tasks by Reducing Gradient Interference
Our phenomenological argument in Sec. 2 motivates the claim that larger models are likely to learn
a part of the data distribution smaller models will fail to learn. We next aim to get more concrete
about this claim. Specifically, we exploit the fact that our argument is merely based on monotonic
(power-law) scaling—a phenomenon even synthetic tasks can recapitulate [30–35, 37–40]. Such
tasks have in fact been used in prior work to make accurate predictions about scaling behavior for
large-scale models [51, 52]. We thus follow this line of work and develop a multi-task learning setup
that helps assess which tasks a larger model can learn but a smaller model cannot. We generalize
our claims to an off-the-shelf language model pretraining pipeline [53] in Sec. 4, finding the core
hypotheses derived out of this toy setting hold true on even a large-scale training pipeline.
Data. We consider a multi-task learning setup where samples are drawn from a mixture of K linear
regression  tasks. Specifically, the k th task is assumedPto appear with⊤ frequency πk > 0, such that
                                                     ⊤
P
   k π k = 1, and  has    covariance C k = B k Λ k Bk  =  j≥1 λk,j bk,j bk,j . Here, the “feature matrix”
Bk = [bk,1 , bk,2 , . . .] is assumed to have orthonormal columns; Λk = diag(λk,1 , λk,2 , . . .) with
λk,1 ≥ λk,2 ≥ · · · ≥ 0; and different tasks occupy orthogonal blocks, i.e., Bk⊤ Bℓ = 0 for k ̸= ℓ. If
the spectrum {λk,j } decays slowly, the task requires more directions for producing the corresponding
target—we can thus compare the relative complexity of two tasks by comparing the rate at which
their spectra decay. Compared to prior work studying theory of scaling laws based on toy regression
tasks, we emphasize that our setup involves the learning of multiple tasks simultaneously.
    2We note power-law scaling need not hold asymptotically [31, 52], which is why we call this argument phenomenological.
It motivates the subsequent, rigorous claims.


                                                            3
( )                                   (b)




Figure 2: Feature Utility Predicts Learning Order. We train students of varying width on a mixture
of K = 32 regression tasks with power-law task frequencies (β) and plot per-task loss (normalized by
mean predictor). (a) Empirical phase diagram where task features (β = 1.0) are retained as a function
of width and task frequency, matching our prediction. (b) Loss matches the analytic prediction from
Theorem 3 across task-frequency exponents. Overall, we see that increasing width preferentially
improves low-frequency tasks because it allows the model to retain lower-utility features.
a
Teacher / Student Models. For a given input x ∼ N (0, I), the teacher for task k is defined
            1/2
as yk = Λk Bk⊤ x. The student uses a shared width-N encoder U ∈ Rd×N , U ⊤ U = I, with
projector PU = U U ⊤ , together with task-specific linear decoders Dk to discern between tasks.
Correspondingly, the student prediction is yˆk = Dk U ⊤ x. The total mixture loss is the weighted sum
            PK
LN (U ) = k=1 πk ℓk (U ), where ℓk (U ) = E ∥yk − Dk U ⊤ x∥22 is loss of the k th task. Note that
                                                                           1/2
herein, since the optimal decoder admits a closed-form solution Dk∗ = Λk Bk⊤ U , we solely analyze
the dynamics of the encoder, which produces features used by the student for making predictions.
3.1      Larger Models Learn Rarer, More Complex Tasks
In order to narrow down a mechanism that explains how larger models may be able to learn more, we
must first identify precisely what it is that a larger model learns but a smaller one fails to. We begin
with answering this question in our toy setup.
Theorem 3 (Features are Learned in Order of Utility). For a given U , the mixture loss reduces to
                                                     PK
LN (U ) = Tr(M ) − Tr(U ⊤ M U ), where M := k=1 πk Ck . Hence, a width-N minimizer spans
the top-N eigenspace of M , whose eigenvalues are defined by the weighted per-task spectra:
                                                     uk,j := πk λk,j .                                                    (2)
Thus, the optimal encoder keeps the N features (k, j) with largest uk,j —we call these terms
           This implies if nk (N ) denotes the number of retained features from task k, then
utilities. P
ℓ∗k (N ) =    j>nk (N ) λk,j . Conversely, the minimum width at which a model learns at least m
features for all tasks is N ∗ (m) = min N : nk (N ) ≥ m .
                                                       	

In the context of our toy task, the statement above helps answer the question “what does width
buy?” by defining a concrete ranking rule for feature learning.3 Specifically, it says a larger model,
asymptotically, learns exactly those features whose utilities are lower than those of the features
learned by a smaller model. This implies if a task is observed infrequently or it involves several
features, e.g., if its spectrum decays very slowly, then (on average) only a larger model will learn it.
Verification. We verify the claim above by training our student model on a mixture of K = 32 tasks,
using the Adam optimizer for 100K steps (the loss does not improve beyond this budget even when
trained up to 10× longer; see Fig. 21). We use a power-law prior k −β to define task frequencies, and
a power-law per-task spectrum λk,j ∝ j −α . For simplicity of visualization, we let α = 2 be shared
across tasks and only vary task frequencies by changing β (see App. D for experiments modulating
complexity by varying α). Results are reported in Fig. 2 (also see App. E for further results). We find
(a) the per-task loss and (b) the overall residual loss predictably reduce with model width. Critically,
we see larger models learn infrequent tasks better than smaller ones.
3.2      Scaling Reduces Interference and Allows for Retention of Rare Task Observations
While the argument above—i.e., a larger model learns low utility, infrequent features—is intuitively
reasonable, it is critical to note that if the frequency at which a task or its features are seen is very
      3 This
        claim can also be seen as a static ordering rule that local optima visited by a model during training will be expected
to dynamically follow in its saddle-to-saddle dynamics [54–57]


                                                              4
low, then, regardless of size, there is a statistical bottleneck here that a model needs to circumvent.
For example, in the experiments shown in Fig. 2b, a model must learn a task that constitutes merely
0.25% of observations. We next analyze how width helps surmount this challenge. To this end, note
that for the k th task, the Riemannian gradient is Gk (U ) = 2(I − PU )Ck U , and hence the mixture
gradient is U˙ = 2(I − PU )M U . We then have the following claim.
Theorem 4 (Residual Controls Learning).    PLet F ⊆ [K] denote the common or frequent tasks. Define  
these tasks’ weighted covariance MF := k∈F πk Ck and residual signal δF (U ) := Tr (I−PU )MF .
Then, the aggregate common-task gradient GF (U ) = 2(I − PU )MF U obeys the bound
                                                     p
                                  ∥GF (U )∥F ≤ 2 λ1 (MF ) δF (U ).                                 (3)

The statement above says a set of tasks move the model only through the part of their covariance
that is not already explained by the current representation, i.e., the residual δF (U ). Correspondingly,
once the high-utility common-task features have been learned, their updates become weak (i.e., low
norm). This leaves any spare width available to rare tasks. More precisely, let µF1 ≥ µF2 ≥ · · · be
           P of MF . The best width-N representation for the common tasks alone leaves residual
the eigenvalues
δF∗ (N ) = i>N µFi . Then, via Theorem 4, we get the following.
                                                                                                      	
Corollary 5 (Width-Scaling Reduces Competition). Define NF (ε) := min N : i>N µFi ≤ ε .
                                                                                         P
                                                                                              p
For every N ≥ NF (ε), there exists an encoder for which δF∗ (N ) ≤ ϵ and ∥GF (U )∥F ≤ 2 µF1 ϵ.
That is, once N ≳ NF (ε), the model contains enough resources that can be allocated to the common
tasks, rendering the gradient towards them weak. This makes the remaining resources available to
rare tasks. However, even once interference is weak enough for a rare task to be learned, it is unclear
whether gradient descent can actually consolidate that signal across its infrequent observations. To
this end, we next characterize the local condition under which a specific rare feature can pull the
model towards itself, without forcing the forgetting of well-learned tasks. Specifically, assume we
                                                                                                 (N )
wanted to learn a rare rank-one task Cr = λr br b⊤r orthogonal to the common block. Let UF            be
                                             F      F
top-N eigenspace of MF with eigenvalues µ1 ≥ µ2 ≥ · · · . Then, we have the following claim.
                                                                                   (N )
Proposition 6 (Interference Reduces via Scaling). The common-task solution UF is stable against
direction br , i.e., common tasks’ loss does not grow by learning of br , iff πr λr < µFN . Thus, the
critical width at which br gets learned is Nrcrit := min{N : µFN ≤ πr λr }.
The claim above hence shows width scaling helps in                                                  256
two related but distinct ways. First, it reduces the           1.0
                                                               0.8                                  128
                                                         Norm. signal




total unresolved common-task signal δF∗ (N ), which
                                                               0.6                                  64
                                                               0.4
                                                                                                  Width N
bounds the aggregate common-task gradient. Sec-
                                                                                                    32
ond, as Proposition 6 shows, it lowers the weakest             0.2     Most
                                    F
occupied common-task utility µN , which determines             0.0                                  16
                                                                       Rare
whether a particular rare feature can displace a com-          0.2     δF* (Nrcrit)                 8
mon feature and become locally stable; if the rare                                                  4
                                                                     10 3           10 2   10 1
feature’s utility is lower, even if the model updates to
                                                                               Residual δF
learn it, the common tasks’ least utility feature will Figure 3: Residual Controls           Learning. We
eventually replace it. This will result in a swinging, plot signals encoded in model representations
update-and-forget learning dynamic where the rare for most frequent and rarest tasks as a func-
task features and lowest utility features of common tion of width N and remaining residual δ . In
                                                                                                       F
tasks will compete over model parameters. Overall, line with our predictions, we see larger mod-
this suggests the learning bottleneck is defined by els perfectly capture tasks of all frequencies,
the interaction between data and scale: if the task while smaller models do not. Meanwhile,
we care to learn does not have sufficient utility for even for the largest models, when the residual
reducing the loss, then the model will prefer to learn signal to be explained for frequent tasks is
and preserve lower-order modes of other tasks; how- high, rarer tasks struggle to be learned.
ever, by increasing width, one avails capacity to such
low-utility tasks and reduces competition between tasks over model parameters, enabling learning of
the rare task without forcing the forgetting of features relevant to common tasks.
Validation. We train models of varying width on the same setup as Fig. 2 and plot how much signal
from directions describing a task is present in the model’s intermediate representation. Specifically,
since ℓk (U ) = Tr((I − PU )Ck ), the signal captured for task k is Tr(PU Ck ), where Tr(.) denotes


                                                   5
    ( )




    (b)




    Figure 4: Rare-Task Retention by Larger Models. We isolate retention by training with a matched-
    frequency injection protocol: the rare task is withheld for G steps and then reintroduced in a batch
a
    such that its overall frequency is consistent across settings. (a) Training dynamics for G = 1280.
    We see small models briefly encode the rare task (Norm. signal s˜r : left-y axis) after each injection;
    specifically, ∆s˜r increases at point of injection, as shown by green dotted line (‘gain’). However, as
    frequent-task updates resume, this signal is lost between injection steps (‘decay’: gray dotted line).
    Meanwhile, larger models retain more of the rare-task signal between injections and accumulate
    it over training. (b) Across injection gaps G and widths N , rare-task signal decays rapidly in
    narrow models but remains stable in wider models, while frequent-task signal is largely unaffected.
    Furthermore, by computing the cosine similarity of gradients via a batch of rare-task samples Gr and
    frequent task samples GF , we see scaling provides enough representational capacity such that updates
    from frequent tasks no longer overwrite rare-task features before the next rare observation arrives.
                                                      Tr(PU Ck )
    trace of a matrix. We thus measure sk (U ) =        Tr(Ck ) . To contextualize this value, we normalize
    with respect to a random baseline, yielding    s˜k (U ) = sk (U )−N/d
                                                                  1−N/d ; N/d denotes the expected value
    of sk (U ) if U were a randomly drawn matrix from the Stiefel manifold. We call this quantity
    “Normalized Signal”. Results are shown in Fig. 3. We see when the model width is small, frequent
    tasks have a high residual signal remaining to be explained; here the set of frequent tasks is defined
    as top-K tasks whose prior sums to 0.8, resulting in K = 3. Correspondingly, rare tasks’ signal in
    model representation is no better than random. Meanwhile, as we scale, once the width crosses our
    predicted threshold δF∗ (Nrcrit ), we find the bulk of the frequent tasks’ signal is explained away and
    rare tasks start to get learned.
    To isolate how the gap between observations interacts with width, we also design a matched-frequency
    injection experiment: the rare task is excluded from training for G steps, then injected in a batch
    enlarged to m = G · B · ρr rare samples so that its long-run frequency exactly matches the setup
    of Fig. 2. This emphasizes the ability of a model to retain memories about observed data, while
    preserving the total frequency with which it is seen. Results are shown in Fig. 4. We see at the end of
    training, rare-task signal decays monotonically with G at all widths, but far more steeply for smaller
    models. Meanwhile, the learning dynamics in panel (b) show that after each injection, a larger model
    accumulates rare-task signal and retains enough of it to build on the next injection, while a smaller
    model decays back to near-zero in between (an intuitive model explaining this dynamic is shown in
    Fig. 11 and analytically described in App. C.4). Overall, our results showing how larger models learn
    tasks smaller models do not can be summarized as follows.

          Hypothesis: Scaling Enables Learning via Reduced Interference and Better Retention

          Given the same training setup, larger models better learn tasks in the tail of the data dis-
          tribution. When such a task is observed, a larger model can retain part of the update and
          build on it when the task appears again. In a small model, the same parameters face more
          competition: updates from frequent tasks undo the rare-task update before the next rare batch
          arrives. Rare-task learning then becomes an update-and-forget loop.



                                                       6
                  ( )                                                                 (b)
                                 101
                                                                                                     12




                    Tr in Loss
                                                                                                     10




                                                                                        Ev l Loss
                                 100
                                                                                                       8

                                                                                                       6
                                 10−1
                                                                                                      4
                                        1K                   10K           40K                                           0         2K         4K      6K        8K     10K
                                                Tr ining Step                                                                           Tr ining Step
            Figure 6: Behavioral Evidence. (a) Tasks are learned in the order of frequency. Solid lines: We inject
            the same comparison task (TCMP ) at different frequencies and measure the task training loss. Dashed
            lines: Reference arithmetic tasks observed from pre-training data. (b) With matched-frequency
            injection of the comparison task (TCMP ), i.e., injecting N task instances every N batches, a larger
            injection gap N degrades task loss, while a smaller injection gap leads to almost identical loss.

            4     Corroborating Claims with the OLMo Pretraining Pipeline
a
    a
    a
    a
        a
            We now verify the claims of Sec. 3 in a realistic LLM pre-training setting using the OLMo pipeline.
            We train models of size 4M to 4B on up to 210B tokens (∼50K steps). Following the structure of
            Sec. 3, we offer analyses at three levels: loss, representation, and gradient.
            4.1    Setup

            A key variable in our claims is the frequency of a task.4 However, measuring the frequency of a
            naturally occurring task in pre-training data is challenging, as instances from the same task can occur
            in many surface forms. To tightly control task frequency, we adopt a data injection framework from
            the memorization literature [58–61]. We inject different instances sampled from the distribution
            of a “special” task T at a controlled frequency f to measure whether a model has learned the task
            distribution. The task T is special in the sense that it is unlikely to be part of normal pre-training data.
            We then train models of various sizes on data mixtures generated from different values of f .
            Tasks. We consider two special tasks T : compari-                                       ( )                                 Tr in Loss              Test Acc.
            son (TCMP ) and modular addition (TADD ). Both tasks                                                         2.4e −5
                                                                                                     Freq. (per token)




            are encoded as a sequence of three tokens: TOK1,                                                             2.4e −6
            TOK2, LABEL, where TOK1, TOK2 ∈ S, a set of 100
            tokens randomly sampled from the vocab. There are                                                            2.4e −7

            exactly 10K instances per task, which are split 50/50                                                        2.4e −8
            for training and testing. Critically, both tasks require                                                               4M   20M   300M    1B   4M    20M   300M   1B
            models to learn certain geometrical structures to gen-                                  (b)
            eralize [62]. This provides a measure for learning a
                                                                                                                         7.8e −3
                                                                                                     Freq. (per token)




            task (as opposed to memorizing training instances)
            and a set of features to verify the interference hypoth-                                                     9.8e −4

            esis of Sec. 3.                                                                                              2.4e −4

            Data. We use Dolma v1.7 as the pre-training cor-                                                             2.4e −5
            pus [63]. Given a task T , we inject instances sampled                                                                 20M 300M    1B     4B   20M 300M     1B    4B
            from its train split at a frequency of 7.8 × 10−3 to
                                                                                                                                                    Model Size
            2.4 × 10−8 , roughly from 1K instances per batch
            to 1 instance every 10 batches. To ensure the in-                             Figure 5: Larger Models Learn Rare Tasks;
            jected task frequency is comparable to the frequency                          Smaller Models Do Not. We visualize train-
            of tasks learned in pre-training, we sample two ref-
                                                        aa
                                                                                          ing loss and test accuracy for the (a) Com-
            erence tasks Rcmp and Radd from pre-training that                             parison task (TCMP ) and (b) Modular Addi-
            involve similar high-level functions. The three-token                         tion task (TADD ). Orange color indicates
            sequence plus an end of document token replace the                            lower loss/higher accuracy. Overall, we see
            first four tokens of a training sequence. See App. B.3                        that increasing width enables learning of low-
            for further details on the experimental setup.                                frequency tasks, in line with our prior claims.

                4 Defining       the complexity of a natural task is difficult, and hence we solely focus on frequency in this section.


                                                                                  7
                                    Geometry                                                                          Frequency                                               Size
           ( )                                                                                    1.0




                                                                          R 2 (Top-50 Subsp ce)
                                                                                                  0.8


                                                                                                  0.6


                                                                                                  0.4


                                                                                                  0.2

                           −2.0 −1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0   0.5 1.0        1.5                                 0       10K         20K           30K       40K   0       10K         20K           30K       40K
           (b)
                      40
                                                                                                  80




                                                                               # Fourier Modes
                      20
                                                                                                  60
              PC 2




                      0
                                                                                                   40

                     −20
                                                                                                  20

                     −40                                                                            0
                              −40    −20     0       20        40                                       5K   7.5K     10K   12.5K   15K     17.5K   20K   5K   7.5K     10K   12.5K   15K     17.5K   20K


                                           PC 1                                                                                             Tr ining Steps

        Figure 7: Representational Evidence. Scaling model size (width) and increasing task frequency lead
        to models learning more task-relevant features. Rows correspond to (a) the comparison task TCMP and
a
    a
              a
        (b) the modular addition task TADD . The first column shows feature geometry, visualizing the global
        token order features for TCMP and the Fourier-mode features for TADD . The last two columns quantify
        how these features scale with task frequency and model size. For both tasks, the task features are
        better represented in larger models trained on higher task frequency.

        Models. We train OLMo models [64] with 4M, 20M, 300M, 1B, and 4B parameters. We focus
        on scaling the models’ hidden and MLP dimensions and the number of attention heads; the 4M
        parameter model has depth 8 and the rest have depth 16. See App. B.2 for further details.
        4.2   Behavioral Evidence
        Larger Models Learn Rarer Tasks. We first replicate the behavioral findings in Sec. 3.1. We
        measure the effect of task frequency by comparing multiple training runs that only differ by the
        frequency of the injected task. As shown in Fig. 5, larger models learn lower-frequency tasks much
        better than smaller models do. This matches the pattern in Fig. 2. Moreover, tasks are learned in the
        order of frequency. For each model run, we compare the order in which the injected task TCMP and
        the reference tasks are learned, as shown in Fig. 6a. Most importantly, larger models do not just lead
        to better memorization of training instances, i.e., low training loss, but also learn generalizable task
        structures, i.e., high eval accuracy. On TADD , only larger models trained on higher frequency exhibit
        the grokking phenomenon [65].
        Rare-Task Retention Has an Effect on Learning. We conduct the matched-frequency injection
        experiment as described in Fig. 4, i.e., injecting N task instances every N batches, for N =
        1, 10, 20, 50, 100. Fig. 6b shows the effects of retention on learning, as models trained with larger
        gaps between task instances have higher task loss, even though the global task frequency of all runs
        is equivalent.
        4.3   Representational Evidence
        Task Features. In our toy setting (Sec. 3), we know analytically which features are necessary for
        learning the kth task, i.e., Bk , and to what extent the model can represent these features, i.e., PU .
        For our OLMo models, we can empirically identify a set of causal features that a pre-trained LM
        would use to solve the task and localize them in the model representations. Specifically, for TCMP , the
        task feature of core relevance is the global order of the tokens, which allows number comparisons;
        meanwhile for TADD , task features are the Fourier modes [66–68], as shown in Fig. 7. We visualize
        the feature geometry using the largest model trained on the most frequent task data. These task
        features allow us to conduct versions of the gradient and representation-level analyses in Sec. 3.
        More Task Features are Present in Larger Model Representations. We first localize the task
        features in models that have clearly learned the task. We then measure to what extent these target
        task features are present in all models, which parallels the metric ℓk (U ) used in the toy setting. For
        localization, we use distributed alignment search (DAS) [69] which finds subspaces that causally


                                                                                                                8
                                                                                  B tch Gr dient vs. T sk Reference
                                                      0.2
                                                      0.0
                                                     −0.2
                            Cosine Simil rity
                                                                                T sk-Token Gr dient vs. T sk Reference

                                                      0.5

                                                      0.0

                                                                              Non-T sk Token Gr dient vs. T sk Reference
                                                      0.2
                                                      0.0
                                                     −0.2
                                                                0       100              200                                      300            400          500
                                                                                         Δ Tr ining Step
                        Figure 9: Gradient Interference. We inject 100 instances of the TCMP task every 100 batches and
                        analyze how batch gradients align with a task reference direction gr . We further decompose the batch
                        gradient into contributions from task tokens and non-task tokens. Top: Cosine similarity between
a
    a
        a
            a
                a
                    a
                        a
                                  a
                                                a
                                                        a
                                                            a
                        full-batch gradient direction and the task direction gr . Middle: Cosine similarity between batch task
                        gradient direction and gr . Higher values imply more task signals. Bottom: Cosine similarity between
                        batch non-task gradient direction and gr . Lower values imply less gradient interference. Overall, the
                        batch gradient directions of larger models carry more task signals with little to no interference.

                        encode the features. For TCMP , a global ordering of the tokens can be localized to a 1-D subspace in
                        the residual stream of the first layer. For TADD , Fourier modes can be identified in the residual stream
                        from earlier layers to the last layer. We then use task-specific metrics to measure to what extent these
                        task features are present in model representations. For TCMP , since the geometry of the task feature is
                        a single direction, we apply linear regression to representations spanning the top K = 50 principal
                        components. For TADD , we measure the total number of Fourier modes present through all layers. We
                        include the details in App. B.4. The last two columns of Fig. 7 show the extent to which the target
                        task features are present in each model across checkpoints. For the frequency (middle) column, we
                        fix the model size to 1B. For the model size (last) column, we fix the task frequency to be 2.4 × 10−6
                        for TCMP and 7.8 × 10−3 for TADD . We see that (i) the presence of task features is highly correlated
                        with high accuracy on the test set, and (ii) larger models and models trained on more frequent task
                        data clearly learn these task features faster.
                        4.4                         Gradient Evidence
                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                   Δ Ev l Loss (w.r.t. Step 0)




                        We now connect the behavioral evidence (Sec. 4.2)
                        and the internal representation account (Sec. 4.3) by                                               −0.5
                        analyzing how task gradients interfere with non-task
                        gradients on a set of neurons that implement the task                                               −1.0
                        circuit. We focus on TCMP training runs in Fig. 8,
                                                                                                                            −1.5
                        where 100 task instances are injected every 100 steps.
                                                                                                                            −2.0
                        Task Neurons. We first identify which MLP layers
                        implement the task features defined in Sec. 4.3. For                                                −2.5
                        all the models that we compared, the first layer MLP                                                           0   100   200   300   400    500
                        has the largest causal effects on task predictions. We                                                    Δ Tr ining Step
                        further identify the top K neurons in the first layer                                Figure 8: Rare-Task Retention. Larger mod-
                        MLP that have the largest gradient magnitude and use                                 els can retain the injected task information
                        the gradients of these neurons for analysis. Details                                 better, i.e., larger task eval loss drop, when
                        can be found in App. B.5.                             a
                                                                              a
                                                                                                             injecting task instances every 100 batches.
                        Task Reference Direction gr . We estimate the task reference direction using the aggregated gradient
                        of the task loss computed over all 10K task instances, an analogy to Gr in the toy setting. This
                        direction may shift across training steps; however, at a given step, it is the optimal task direction.


                                                                                               9
Larger Models Show Less Gradient Interference Between General Language Modeling and
Our Injected Task. We quantify the relation between the task reference gr and the batch gradient
g, which can be further decomposed into gradient from the task tokens gt (if exists in batch) and
non-task tokens gnt , i.e., g = gt + gnt . We first measure the cosine similarity between task reference
and batch gradient direction, replicating the results in Fig. 4. We additionally analyze whether task or
non-task tokens contribute to this similarity; while task token gradient aligning with task reference
gr is expected, non-task token gradient with non-zero cosine similarity suggests that the language
modeling direction is interfering with the task gradient direction.
Results are shown in Fig. 9. In the top panel, larger models have higher similarity between g and
gr at the injection steps, 0.08 ± 0.02 for the 1B model and 0.04 ± 0.04 for the 300M model, the
similarity typically regresses towards zero between injections. For the 20M model, the similarity
scores oscillate wildly across batches, even at the injection step. In fact, the high similarity between
non-task gradient gnt and gr reveals that for the 20M model the batch gradient similarity mostly
comes from random collisions with task direction, with a similarity score of 0.10 ± 0.09, while for
larger models, gnt is almost orthogonal to gr , with 7.58 × 10−5 ± 0.02 for the 1B model, suggesting
little to no gradient interference on this set of neurons.

5   Discussion
We develop a data-centric account of why larger models can learn tasks that smaller models fail
to learn. Specifically, we show that larger models can learn rare tasks from the data mixture, and
this phenomenon is explained by learning dynamics, i.e., competition of resources and retention of
memories, as well as the task frequency and complexity. Our perspective highlights that understanding
scaling requires thinking beyond model expressivity. We need to understand how learning dynamics
are at play with task frequency and complexity. It also points toward more intentional design of data
mixtures to better elicit target capabilities. For example, simply scaling up the frequency of a target
task might provide a more efficient way to learn the task than scaling up the model size. Lastly, our
findings on how better retention of memories enables learning rare tasks offers a new perspective that
views memorization as a mechanism that can support learning abstraction: by retaining task instances
longer, models can accumulate signals across batches to learn more generalizable structures of the
task. This suggests memorization can in fact be beneficial, in line with arguments by Feldman [70].

Limitations
As noted above, our account for why larger models learn more emphasizes the interplay of learning
dynamics, task frequency, and task complexity. However, as discussed in Sec. 1, there are other
plausible accounts for explaining this phenomenon, e.g., ones that focus on model expressivity and
sample efficiency. Our explanation hence should not be interpreted as a complete account of scaling.
Instead, these explanations are complementary: expressivity constrains what can be represented,
sample efficiency shapes how effectively data is used, and our account highlights how learning
dynamics interact with the frequency and complexity of tasks. A full understanding likely requires
accommodating all these explanations, rather than viewing them as competing hypotheses. We
also note we validated our key theoretical results using the OLMo pre-training pipeline, finding the
empirical results on the injected tasks strongly match what the theoretical results predict. However,
we acknowledge that empirical validation in a realistic pre-training setting could still leave some
analytic gaps. For example, we did not empirically verify behavior of larger-scale language models
or over-trained language models. We also selected injected tasks that matched the frequency of tasks
learned in OLMo pre-training, which does not rule out other scaling behaviors with extreme task
frequency. Our empirical results should therefore be viewed as supporting evidence. We encourage
future work to explore different training regimes, more tasks, and different frequency ranges.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Blake Bordelon, Jacob Zavatone-Veth, and Core Francisco Park for several useful
references that helped concretize the claims posited in this work, and Yasaman Bahri, Surya Ganguli,
Ari Holtzman, Stephanie Chan, Freya Behrens, Tom McGrath, Owen Lewis, Atticus Geiger, Jack
Merullo, and Thomas Fel for fruitful conversations during the course of this project. The authors
also thank Thomas Icard for several comments on an earlier version of this draft. This research is
supported in part by a grant from Open Philanthropy (Coefficient Giving) to CP.


                                                  10
References
 [1] Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan
     McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, et al. Openai gpt-5 system card.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03267, 2025.
 [2] Anthropic. System Card: Claude Mythos Preview, 2026. https://www-cdn.anthropic.
     com/08ab9158070959f88f296514c21b7facce6f52bc.pdf.
 [3] Google DeepMind. Gemini 3 Pro - Model Card, 2026. https://storage.googleapis.
     com/deepmind-media/Model-Cards/Gemini-3-Pro-Model-Card.pdf.
 [4] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao,
     Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.
 [5] DeepSeek-AI. DeepSeek-V4-Pro, 2026. https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/
     DeepSeek-V4-Pro/blob/main/DeepSeek_V4.pdf.
 [6] Kimi Team, Tongtong Bai, Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, SH Cai, Yuan Cao, Y Charles, HS Che,
     Cheng Chen, Guanduo Chen, et al. Kimi k2. 5: Visual agentic intelligence. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2602.02276, 2026.
 [7] Thomas Kwa, Ben West, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia, Max Hasin, Sami Jawhar,
     Megan Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney Von Arx, et al. Measuring AI ability to complete long
     software tasks. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 2025.
 [8] Elliot Glazer, Ege Erdil, Tamay Besiroglu, Diego Chicharro, Evan Chen, Alex Gunning,
     Caroline Falkman Olsson, Jean-Stanislas Denain, Anson Ho, Emily de Oliveira Santos, et al.
     Frontiermath: A benchmark for evaluating advanced mathematical reasoning in ai. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2411.04872, 2024.
 [9] ARC Prize Foundation. ARC-AGI-3, 2026. https://arcprize.org/arc-agi/3.
[10] Mike A Merrill, Alexander G Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich,
     Lin Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E Kelly Buchanan, et al. Terminal-bench: Bench-
     marking agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. In The Fourteenth Inter-
     national Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/
     forum?id=a7Qa4CcHak.
[11] Anthropic.  Responsible Scaling Policy, 2026.             https://www.anthropic.com/
     responsible-scaling-policy.
[12] OpenAI. Our Approach to Frontier Risk, 2023. https://openai.com/global-affairs/
     our-approach-to-frontier-risk/.
[13] Oriane Siméoni, Huy V Vo, Maximilian Seitzer, Federico Baldassarre, Maxime Oquab, Cijo
     Jose, Vasil Khalidov, Marc Szafraniec, Seungeun Yi, Michaël Ramamonjisoa, et al. Dinov3.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104, 2025.
[14] Shengding Hu, Xin Liu, Xu Han, Xinrong Zhang, Chaoqun He, Weilin Zhao, Yankai Lin, Ning
     Ding, Zebin Ou, Guoyang Zeng, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Predicting emergent abilities
     with infinite resolution evaluation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=lDbjooxLkD.
[15] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani
     Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto,
     Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large
     language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
     https://openreview.net/forum?id=yzkSU5zdwD.
[16] Jason Wei. 137 emergent abilities of large language models, 2022. https://www.jasonwei.
     net/blog/emergence.


                                              11
[17] Sanjeev Arora and Anirudh Goyal. A theory for emergence of complex skills in language
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15936, 2023.

[18] Zhengxiao Du, Aohan Zeng, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. Understanding emergent abilities
     of language models from the loss perspective. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
     id=35DAviqMFo.

[19] Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao
     Liu, Da Huang, Denny Zhou, et al. Larger language models do in-context learning differently.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03846, 2023.

[20] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon
     Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural
     language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

[21] Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan
     Kianinejad, Md Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is
     predictable, empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.

[22] Jonathan S. Rosenfeld, Amir Rosenfeld, Yonatan Belinkov, and Nir Shavit. A constructive
     prediction of the generalization error across scales. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ryenvpEKDr.

[23] Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Hee-
     woo Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive
     generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701, 2020.

[24] Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish. Scaling laws for
     transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01293, 2021.

[25] Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song,
     John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language
     models: Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446,
     2021.

[26] Ibrahim M Alabdulmohsin, Behnam Neyshabur, and Xiaohua Zhai. Revisiting neural scaling
     laws in language and vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22300–
     22312, 2022.

[27] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian,
     Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The
     llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

[28] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
     Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
     Training compute-optimal large language models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle
     Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=iBBcRUlOAPR.

[29] Tim Pearce and Jinyeop Song. Reconciling kaplan and chinchilla scaling laws. Transactions
     on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/
     forum?id=NLoaLyuUUF.

[30] Blake Bordelon, Alexander Atanasov, and Cengiz Pehlevan. A dynamical model of neural
     scaling laws. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL
     https://openreview.net/forum?id=nbOY1OmtRc.

[31] Blake Bordelon, Alexander Atanasov, and Cengiz Pehlevan. How feature learning can improve
     neural scaling laws. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=dEypApI1MZ.


                                               12
[32] Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jared Kaplan, Jaehoon Lee, and Utkarsh Sharma. Explaining
     neural scaling laws. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(27):e2311878121,
     2024.
[33] Licong Lin, Jingfeng Wu, Sham M. Kakade, Peter L. Bartlett, and Jason Lee. Scaling laws in
     linear regression: Compute, parameters, and data. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave,
     A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, volume 37, pages 60556–60606. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. doi: 10.
     52202/079017-1937. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
     2024/file/6fcb1afcc1e9c2c82c8ddddf03bcf0f6-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[34] Eric Michaud, Ziming Liu, Uzay Girit, and Max Tegmark. The quantization model of neural
     scaling. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, editors,
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pages 28699–28722. Curran
     Associates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
     2023/file/5b6346a05a537d4cdb2f50323452a9fe-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[35] Alexander Maloney, Daniel A Roberts, and James Sully. A solvable model of neural scaling
     laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16859, 2022.
[36] Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Kyogo Kawaguchi, Robert P. Dick, and Hidenori Tanaka. A percolation
     model of emergence: Analyzing transformers trained on a formal language. In The Thirteenth
     International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.
     net/forum?id=0pLCDJVVRD.
[37] Francesco Cagnetta, Hyunmo Kang, and Matthieu Wyart. Learning curves theory for hierar-
     chically compositional data with power-law distributed features. In Forty-second International
     Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     Lw0kC75dY0.
[38] Francesco Cagnetta, Alessandro Favero, Antonio Sclocchi, and Matthieu Wyart. Scaling laws
     and representation learning in simple hierarchical languages: Transformers vs. convolutional
     architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07070, 2025.
[39] Francesco Cagnetta, Allan Raventós, Surya Ganguli, and Matthieu Wyart. Deriving neural
     scaling laws from the statistics of natural language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07488, 2026.
[40] Benjamin Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, Eran Malach, and Cyril Zhang. Pareto
     frontiers in deep feature learning: Data, compute, width, and luck. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 36:48021–48034, 2023.
[41] Nathan Lambert, Jacob Morrison, Valentina Pyatkin, Shengyi Huang, Hamish Ivison, Faeze
     Brahman, Lester James Validad Miranda, Alisa Liu, Nouha Dziri, Xinxi Lyu, et al. Tulu 3:
     Pushing frontiers in open language model post-training. In Second Conference on Language
     Modeling, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=i1uGbfHHpH.
[42] Jonas Hübotter, Frederike Lübeck, Lejs Behric, Anton Baumann, Marco Bagatella, Daniel
     Marta, Ido Hakimi, Idan Shenfeld, Thomas Kleine Buening, Carlos Guestrin, et al. Reinforce-
     ment learning via self-distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20802, 2026.
[43] Bloomberg.    OpenAI Claims DeepSeek Distilled US Models to Gain an
     Edge,   2026.      https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2026-02-12/
     openai-accuses-deepseek-of-distilling-us-models-to-gain-an-edge?
[44] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
     Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
     reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
[45] Huajian Xin, Z.Z. Ren, Junxiao Song, Zhihong Shao, Wanjia Zhao, Haocheng Wang,
     Bo Liu, Liyue Zhang, Xuan Lu, Qiushi Du, , et al. Deepseek-prover-v1.5: Harnessing
     proof assistant feedback for reinforcement learning and monte-carlo tree search. In The
     Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https:
     //openreview.net/forum?id=I4YAIwrsXa.


                                               13
[46] Rishabh Agarwal, Nino Vieillard, Yongchao Zhou, Piotr Stanczyk, Sabela Ramos Garea,
     Matthieu Geist, and Olivier Bachem. On-policy distillation of language models: Learning from
     self-generated mistakes. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=3zKtaqxLhW.
[47] Siyan Zhao, Zhihui Xie, Mengchen Liu, Jing Huang, Guan Pang, Feiyu Chen, and Aditya
     Grover. Self-distilled reasoner: On-policy self-distillation for large language models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2601.18734, 2026.
[48] Yunhao Tang, Sid Wang, Lovish Madaan, and Remi Munos. Beyond verifiable rewards: Scaling
     reinforcement learning in language models to unverifiable data. In The Thirty-ninth Annual
     Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2026. URL https://openreview.
     net/forum?id=pc6M9h3T9m.
[49] Kimi Team, Angang Du, Bofei Gao, Bowei Xing, Changjiu Jiang, Cheng Chen, Cheng Li,
     Chenjun Xiao, Chenzhuang Du, Chonghua Liao, et al. Kimi k1. 5: Scaling reinforcement
     learning with llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12599, 2025.
[50] Cody Blakeney, Jessica Zosa Forde, Jonathan Frankle, Ziliang Zong, and Matthew L Leav-
     itt. Reduce, reuse, recycle: Improving training efficiency with distillation. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2211.00683, 2022.
[51] Shikai Qiu, Lechao Xiao, Andrew Gordon Wilson, Jeffrey Pennington, and Atish Agarwala.
     Scaling collapse reveals universal dynamics in compute-optimally trained neural networks.
     In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. URL https://
     openreview.net/forum?id=Fvq9ogLnLN.
[52] Elliot Paquette, Courtney Paquette, Lechao Xiao, and Jeffrey Pennington. 4+3 phases of
     compute-optimal neural scaling laws. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     37:16459–16537, 2024.
[53] Team OLMo, Pete Walsh, Luca Soldaini, Dirk Groeneveld, Kyle Lo, Shane Arora, Akshita
     Bhagia, Yuling Gu, Shengyi Huang, Matt Jordan, et al. 2 OLMo 2 Furious, 2024. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.00656.
[54] Yedi Zhang, Andrew M Saxe, and Peter E. Latham. Saddle-to-saddle dynamics explains a
     simplicity bias across neural network architectures. In The Fourteenth International Con-
     ference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     Vit5M0G5Gb.
[55] Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. Sgd learning on neural
     networks: leap complexity and saddle-to-saddle dynamics. In The Thirty Sixth Annual
     Conference on Learning Theory, pages 2552–2623. PMLR, 2023.
[56] Arthur Jacot, François Ged, Berfin Sim¸
                                        ¸ sek, Clément Hongler, and Franck Gabriel. Saddle-to-
     saddle dynamics in deep linear networks: Small initialization training, symmetry, and sparsity.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.15933, 2021.
[57] Daniel Kunin, Giovanni Luca Marchetti, Feng Chen, Dhruva Karkada, James B Simon,
     Michael R DeWeese, Surya Ganguli, and Nina Miolane. Alternating gradient flows: A theory
     of feature learning in two-layer neural networks. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
     id=t7LKc0MMW6.
[58] Matthew Jagielski, Om Thakkar, Florian Tramer, Daphne Ippolito, Katherine Lee, Nicholas
     Carlini, Eric Wallace, Shuang Song, Abhradeep Guha Thakurta, Nicolas Papernot, and Chiyuan
     Zhang. Measuring forgetting of memorized training examples. In The Eleventh International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
     id=7bJizxLKrR.
[59] Nicholas Carlini, Chang Liu, Úlfar Erlingsson, Jernej Kos, and Dawn Song. The secret sharer:
     Evaluating and testing unintended memorization in neural networks. In 28th USENIX Security
     Symposium (USENIX Security 19), pages 267–284, Santa Clara, CA, August 2019. USENIX


                                               14
     Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-06-9. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/
     usenixsecurity19/presentation/carlini.

[60] Jing Huang, Diyi Yang, and Christopher Potts. Demystifying verbatim memorization in large
     language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
     Language Processing, pages 10711–10732, 2024.

[61] Johnny Wei, Ameya Godbole, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Ryan Yixiang Wang, Xiaoyuan Zhu,
     James Flemings, Nitya Kashyap, Krishna P. Gummadi, Willie Neiswanger, and Robin Jia.
     Hubble: a model suite to advance the study of LLM memorization. In The Fourteenth
     International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.
     net/forum?id=ZfdnZhOP0k.

[62] Hyeonbin Hwang and Yeachan Park. Intrinsic task symmetry drives generalization in algorith-
     mic tasks, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.01968.

[63] Luca Soldaini, Rodney Kinney, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk, David Atkinson, Russell
     Authur, Ben Bogin, Khyathi Chandu, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, et al. Dolma: An Open
     Corpus of Three Trillion Tokens for Language Model Pretraining Research. arXiv preprint,
     2024. URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/dolma.

[64] Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Pete Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord,
     Ananya Harsh Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, et al. OLMo: Accelerating
     the science of language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
     for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 15789–15809, Bangkok,
     Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
     acl-long.841. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.841/.

[65] Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra.
     Grokking: Generalization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2201.02177, 2022.

[66] Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress
     measures for grokking via mechanistic interpretability. In The Eleventh International Confer-
     ence on Learning Representations, sep 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     9XFSbDPmdW.

[67] Tianyi Zhou, Deqing Fu, Vatsal Sharan, and Robin Jia. Pre-trained large language models
     use fourier features to compute addition. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neu-
     ral Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     i4MutM2TZb.

[68] Sheridan Feucht, Tal Haklay, Usha Bhalla, Daniel Wurgaft, Can Rager, Raphaël Sarfati, Jack
     Merullo, Thomas McGrath, Owen Lewis, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Thomas Fel, and Atticus
     Geiger. Arithmetic in the wild: Llama uses base-10 addition to reason about cyclic concepts,
     2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.01148.

[69] Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah Goodman. Finding
     alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural representations. In
     Francesco Locatello and Vanessa Didelez, editors, Proceedings of the Third Conference on
     Causal Learning and Reasoning, volume 236 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
     pages 160–187. PMLR, 01–03 Apr 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v236/
     geiger24a.html.

[70] Vitaly Feldman. Does learning require memorization? a short tale about a long tail. In
     Proceedings of the 52nd annual ACM SIGACT symposium on theory of computing, pages
     954–959, 2020.

[71] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
     Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
     text-to-text transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.


                                              15
[72] Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Tengyu Ma, and Percy S Liang. Data selection for
     language models via importance resampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 36:34201–34227, 2023.
[73] Sang Michael Xie, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong, Nan Du, Hanxiao Liu, Yifeng Lu, Percy S Liang,
     Quoc V Le, Tengyu Ma, and Adams Wei Yu. Doremi: Optimizing data mixtures speeds up
     language model pretraining. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[74] Sang Michael Xie. Foundation Models from a Data-Distributional View. Stanford University,
     2024.
[75] Rahul Ramesh, Jialin Mao, Itay Griniasty, Rubing Yang, Han Kheng Teoh, Mark Transtrum,
     James P Sethna, and Pratik Chaudhari. A picture of the space of typical learnable tasks. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2210.17011, 2022.
[76] Rahul Ramesh. The Principles of Learning on Multiple Tasks. PhD thesis, University of
     Pennsylvania, 2025.
[77] Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Hamza Alobei-
     dli, Alessandro Cappelli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The
     refinedweb dataset for falcon LLM: Outperforming curated corpora with web data only. In
     Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Bench-
     marks Track, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=kM5eGcdCzq.
[78] Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíˇcek, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin Raffel, Leandro
     Von Werra, Thomas Wolf, et al. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text
     data at scale. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:30811–30849, 2024.
[79] Pratyush Maini, Vineeth Dorna, Parth Doshi, Aldo Carranza, Fan Pan, Jack Urbanek, Paul
     Burstein, Alex Fang, Alvin Deng, Amro Abbas, et al. Beyondweb: Lessons from scaling
     synthetic data for trillion-scale pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10975, 2025.
[80] Dylan Sam, Sachin Goyal, Pratyush Maini, Alexander Robey, and J Zico Kolter. When should
     we introduce safety interventions during pretraining? arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.07087, 2026.
[81] Sachin Goyal, Pratyush Maini, Zachary C Lipton, Aditi Raghunathan, and J Zico Kolter.
     Scaling laws for data filtering–data curation cannot be compute agnostic. In Proceedings of
     the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 22702–22711,
     2024.
[82] Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine learning, 28(1):41–75, 1997.
[83] Rahaf Aljundi. Continual learning in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.02718, 2019.
[84] Bo Liu, Xingchao Liu, Xiaojie Jin, Peter Stone, and Qiang Liu. Conflict-averse gradient
     descent for multi-task learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:
     18878–18890, 2021.
[85] Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Bengio. Gradient based sample
     selection for online continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
     32, 2019.
[86] Runzhe Wu, Ankur Samanta, Ayush Jain, Scott Fujimoto, Jeongyeol Kwon, Ben Kretzu,
     Youliang Yu, Kaveh Hassani, Boris Vidolov, and Yonathan Efroni. Imbalanced gradients in rl
     post-training of multi-task llms. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
     EACL 2026, pages 3137–3150, 2026.
[87] Mohammad Pezeshki, Oumar Kaba, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron C Courville, Doina Precup, and
     Guillaume Lajoie. Gradient starvation: A learning proclivity in neural networks. Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1256–1272, 2021.
[88] Itay Evron, Edward Moroshko, Rachel Ward, Nathan Srebro, and Daniel Soudry. How
     catastrophic can catastrophic forgetting be in linear regression? In Conference on Learning
     Theory, pages 4028–4079. PMLR, 2022.


                                               16
 [89] Martin Marek, Dongkyu Cho, Shikai Qiu, Rumi Chunara, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon
      Wilson. Forgetting in language models: Capacity, optimization, and self-generated replay,
      2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26097.

 [90] Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea
      Finn. Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. Advances in neural information processing
      systems, 33:5824–5836, 2020.

 [91] Ozan Sener and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization. Advances
      in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

 [92] Zhao Chen, Vijay Badrinarayanan, Chen-Yu Lee, and Andrew Rabinovich. Gradnorm: Gra-
      dient normalization for adaptive loss balancing in deep multitask networks. In International
      conference on machine learning, pages 794–803. PMLR, 2018.

 [93] Mihai Suteu and Yike Guo. Regularizing deep multi-task networks using orthogonal gradients.
      arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06844, 2019.

 [94] Mehrdad Farajtabar, Navid Azizan, Alex Mott, and Ang Li. Orthogonal gradient descent for
      continual learning. In International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pages
      3762–3773. PMLR, 2020.

 [95] Peter L Chen, Xiaopeng Li, Xi Chen, and Tianyi Lin. Reward-free alignment for conflicting
      objectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02495, 2026.

 [96] Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Aitor Lewkowycz, and Ethan Dyer. Effect of scale on catastrophic
      forgetting in neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
      URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=GhVS8_yPeEa.

 [97] Darshil Doshi, Tianyu He, Aritra Das, and Andrey Gromov. Grokking modular polynomials.
      arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03495, 2024.

 [98] Pulkit Gopalani, Ekdeep S Lubana, and Wei Hu. Abrupt learning in transformers: A case study
      on matrix completion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:55053–55085,
      2024.

 [99] Shikhar Murty, Pratyusha Sharma, Jacob Andreas, and Christopher Manning. Grokking of
      hierarchical structure in vanilla transformers. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting
      of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 439–448.
      Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2023. URL https://aclanthology.org/
      2023.acl-short.38/.

[100] Tanishq Kumar, Blake Bordelon, Samuel J. Gershman, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Grokking
      as the transition from lazy to rich training dynamics. In The Twelfth International Confer-
      ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
      vt5mnLVIVo.

[101] Dashiell Stander, Qinan Yu, Honglu Fan, and Stella Biderman. Grokking group multiplication
      with cosets. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL
      https://openreview.net/forum?id=hcQfTsVnBo.

[102] Mohamad Amin Mohamadi, Zhiyuan Li, Lei Wu, and Danica J. Sutherland. Why do you grok?
      a theoretical analysis on grokking modular addition. In Forty-first International Conference on
      Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ad5I6No9G1.

[103] Vikrant Varma, Rohin Shah, Zachary Kenton, János Kramár, and Ramana Kumar. Explaining
      grokking through circuit efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02390, 2023.

[104] Depen Morwani, Benjamin L. Edelman, Costin-Andrei Oncescu, Rosie Zhao, and Sham M.
      Kakade. Feature emergence via margin maximization: case studies in algebraic tasks. In
      The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
      //openreview.net/forum?id=i9wDX850jR.


                                                 17
[105] Angelica Chen, Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, Kyunghyun Cho, Matthew L Leavitt, and Naomi Saphra.
      Sudden drops in the loss: Syntax acquisition, phase transitions, and simplicity bias in MLMs.
      In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
      //openreview.net/forum?id=MO5PiKHELW.

[106] Chen Cheng, John Duchi, and Rohith Kuditipudi. Memorize to generalize: on the necessity of
      interpolation in high dimensional linear regression. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages
      5528–5560. PMLR, 2022.

[107] Gavin Brown, Mark Bun, Vitaly Feldman, Adam Smith, and Kunal Talwar. When is memo-
      rization of irrelevant training data necessary for high-accuracy learning? In Proceedings of the
      53rd annual ACM SIGACT symposium on theory of computing, pages 123–132, 2021.

[108] Song Mei and Andrea Montanari. The generalization error of random features regression:
      Precise asymptotics and the double descent curve. Communications on Pure and Applied
      Mathematics, 75(4):667–766, 2022.

[109] Marco Loog, Tom Viering, Alexander Mey, Jesse H Krijthe, and David MJ Tax. A brief
      prehistory of double descent. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(20):
      10625–10626, 2020.

[110] Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak, and Ilya Sutskever.
      Deep double descent: Where bigger models and more data hurt. In International Confer-
      ence on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
      B1g5sA4twr.

[111] Preetum Nakkiran. More data can hurt for linear regression: Sample-wise double descent.
      arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.07242, 2019.

[112] Preetum Nakkiran, Prayaag Venkat, Sham M. Kakade, and Tengyu Ma. Optimal regularization
      can mitigate double descent. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
      URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=7R7fAoUygoa.

[113] Daniel Wurgaft, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Core Francisco Park, Hidenori Tanaka, Gautam
      Reddy, and Noah Goodman. In-context learning strategies emerge rationally. In The Thirty-
      ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2026. URL https:
      //openreview.net/forum?id=bBUUOQI0N6.

[114] Aaditya K Singh, Ted Moskovitz, Felix Hill, Stephanie C.Y. Chan, and Andrew M Saxe. What
      needs to go right for an induction head? a mechanistic study of in-context learning circuits
      and their formation. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL
      https://openreview.net/forum?id=O8rrXl71D5.

[115] Aaditya Singh, Stephanie Chan, Ted Moskovitz, Erin Grant, Andrew Saxe, and Felix Hill.
      The transient nature of emergent in-context learning in transformers. Advances in neural
      information processing systems, 36:27801–27819, 2023.

[116] Core Francisco Park, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, and Hidenori Tanaka. Competition dynamics
      shape algorithmic phases of in-context learning. In The Thirteenth International Confer-
      ence on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
      XgH1wfHSX8.

[117] Nikhil Kandpal, Haikang Deng, Adam Roberts, Eric Wallace, and Colin Raffel. Large language
      models struggle to learn long-tail knowledge. In International conference on machine learning,
      pages 15696–15707. PMLR, 2023.

[118] Pietro Lesci, Clara Meister, Thomas Hofmann, Andreas Vlachos, and Tiago Pimentel. Causal
      estimation of memorisation profiles. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
      Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 15616–15635,
      Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
      v1/2024.acl-long.834. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.834/.


                                                 18
[119] Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and
      Chiyuan Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. In The Eleventh
      International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
      net/forum?id=TatRHT_1cK.
[120] Rohith Kuditipudi, Jing Huang, Sally Zhu, Diyi Yang, Christopher Potts, and Percy
      Liang. Blackbox model provenance via palimpsestic membership inference. In The
      Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2026. URL
      https://openreview.net/forum?id=VRhVS59yhP.
[121] Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, Richard E. Turner, and David Krueger. Fresh in memory: Training-
      order recency is linearly encoded in language model activations. In The Fourteenth Interna-
      tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/
      forum?id=Tn6famjSxN.
[122] Sunny Duan, Mikail Khona, Abhiram Iyer, Rylan Schaeffer, and Ila R Fiete. Uncovering latent
      memories in large language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
      Representations, 2025.
[123] Hoyeon Chang, Jinho Park, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Youngkyung Seo, Du-Seong Chang,
      and Minjoon Seo. How do large language models acquire factual knowledge during pretraining?
      In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
      URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=TYdzj1EvBP.
[124] Kushal Tirumala, Aram Markosyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Armen Aghajanyan. Memorization
      without overfitting: Analyzing the training dynamics of large language models. Advances in
      Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38274–38290, 2022.
[125] Danny Hernandez, Tom Brown, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Sheer El-Showk,
      Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, et al. Scaling laws and
      interpretability of learning from repeated data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10487, 2022.
[126] Steven T Piantadosi. Zipf’s word frequency law in natural language: A critical review and
      future directions. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 21(5):1112–1130, 2014.
[127] Aapo Hyvärinen, Jarmo Hurri, and Patrick O Hoyer. Natural image statistics: A probabilistic
      approach to early computational vision., volume 39. Springer Science & Business Media,
      2009.
[128] Alexander Atanasov, Jacob A Zavatone-Veth, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Scaling and renormaliza-
      tion in high-dimensional regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00592, 2024.
[129] Yunwei Ren, Eshaan Nichani, Denny Wu, and Jason D. Lee. Emergence and scaling laws
      in SGD learning of shallow neural networks. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on
      Neural Information Processing Systems, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
      id=kA2H90nm26.
[130] Katie Everett, Lechao Xiao, Mitchell Wortsman, Alexander A Alemi, Roman Novak, Peter J
      Liu, Izzeddin Gur, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Jaehoon Lee, et al. Scaling
      exponents across parameterizations and optimizers. In Forty-first International Conference on
      Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=0ksNeD1SJT.
[131] Eric J Michaud, Liv Gorton, and Tom McGrath. Understanding sparse autoencoder scaling in
      the presence of feature manifolds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02565, 2025.
[132] Yoonsoo Nam, Nayara Fonseca, Seok H Lee, Chris Mingard, and Ard A Louis. An ex-
      actly solvable model for emergence and scaling laws in the multitask sparse parity problem.
      Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:39632–39693, 2024.
[133] Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable
      neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL
      https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJl-b3RcF7.


                                                19
[134] Eran Malach, Gilad Yehudai, Shai Shalev-Schwartz, and Ohad Shamir. Proving the lottery
      ticket hypothesis: Pruning is all you need. In International conference on machine learning,
      pages 6682–6691. PMLR, 2020.
[135] Ankit Pensia, Shashank Rajput, Alliot Nagle, Harit Vishwakarma, and Dimitris Papailiopou-
      los. Optimal lottery tickets via subset sum: Logarithmic over-parameterization is sufficient.
      Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:2599–2610, 2020.
[136] Ian Magnusson, Nguyen Tai, Ben Bogin, David Heineman, Jena D. Hwang, Luca Soldaini,
      Akshita Bhagia, Jiacheng Liu, Dirk Groeneveld, Oyvind Tafjord, Noah A. Smith, Pang Wei
      Koh, and Jesse Dodge. Datadecide: How to predict best pretraining data with small experiments.
      In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. URL https://
      openreview.net/forum?id=p9YlQPF8fE.
[137] Jiacheng Liu, Sewon Min, Luke Zettlemoyer, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Infini-
      gram: Scaling unbounded n-gram language models to a trillion tokens. In First Conference on
      Language Modeling, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=u2vAyMeLMm.
[138] Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Aryaman Arora, Jing Huang, Zheng Wang, Noah Goodman,
      Christopher Manning, and Christopher Potts. pyvene: A library for understanding and improv-
      ing PyTorch models via interventions. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North
      American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
      nologies (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), pages 158–165. Association for Computational
      Linguistics, June 2024. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-demo.16.
[139] Ky Fan. On a theorem of weyl concerning eigenvalues of linear transformations i. Proceedings
      of the National Academy of Sciences, 35(11):652–655, 1949.
[140] Nikhil Vyas, Alexander Atanasov, Blake Bordelon, Depen Morwani, Sabarish Sainathan,
      and Cengiz Pehlevan. Feature-learning networks are consistent across widths at realistic
      scales. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL
      https://openreview.net/forum?id=LTdfYIvbHc.




                                                20
A    Related Work
Multi-Task Learning. Data distributions neural networks are trained on are often deemed as a
mixture of tasks [63, 71–81]. This motivated works analyzing both the learning dynamics of
training toy models on multi-task distributions and defining methods aimed at reducing interference
between updates caused by learning a task in the presence of other ones. For example, the notion
of “catastrophic interference” has been often characterized in the multi-task learning and continual
learning literature [82, 83], where task gradients conflict or are imbalanced in scale, leading to learning
of only a subset of tasks instead of the entire mixture. Such phenomenology can be intuitively [84–86]
and theoretically explained: e.g., Pezeshki et al. [87] posit the idea of gradient starvation, whereby
a model trained on a mixture of tasks that have different prior frequencies is unable to learn the
infrequent task due to its gradient getting “starved” out, i.e., becoming zero; meanwhile, Evron
et al. [88] characterize how tasks’ observation frequency induces the forgetting of another learned
task in a sequential linear regression setting. Concurrent to our work, Marek et al. [89] show that
forgetting of prior tasks occur when a model has little remaining capacity. These analyses have also
motivated methods to avoid interference and enable learning of multiple tasks: e.g., methods that
perform “surgery” on model gradients [90–92] to make two conflicting tasks’ gradients to have zero
interaction by removing one’s projection towards another [93, 94]; these methods have seen use at
scale as well [95].
It is worth noting that our results are in a similar vein as literature above, but augment prior work
by characterizing the effects of scale and showcasing that even extremely rarely observed tasks can
eventually be learned if one’s model is large enough—empirically, related results corroborating our
claim in a vision scenario was also made in the continual learning literature by Ramasesh et al. [96].
That said, we emphasize that neither do our results imply nor do we claim (in fact, we say otherwise)
that scale alone is the mechanism to enable the learning of a rare task in the presence of other frequent
ones. Indeed, methods discussed above from multi-task / continual learning literature show multiple
tasks can be simultaneously learned by a model.
Memorization and Scaling. The core mechanism posited in our work for how larger models learn
rare tasks involves a model retaining some signature of observed data from a small batch of samples.
In extreme scenarios, e.g., when only a few samples are contained in the batch, such a signature cannot
possibly correspond to a general, abstract task representation. Instead, the signature can be thought of
as a model (at least partially) “memorizing” an observation—once enough observations occur and the
memories aggregate, in our simple toy settings, we find the model consolidates the memories into an
abstract representation that generalizes well. In this sense, we emphasize our core proposition suggests
memorization is not an undesirable property, but instead a prerequisite to eventual generalization for
rare tasks. This mechanism is highly reminiscent of the observations [65, 97, 98] and posited learning
dynamics for grokking, where a model transitions from memorizing observations to generalizing to
novel inputs [66, 99–104]. Critically, our language model pretraining results, where we use modular
addition, i.e., the prototypical grokking task, and find our posited dynamics hold is suggestive that
grokking-like dynamics may in fact occur in practice, especially for rarely observed tasks (closest
result to this end is perhaps the syntax acquisition dynamics demonstrated by Chen et al. [105]). This
argument is in keeping with theoretical works on classification that have argued that memorization is
necessary for generalization—for example, to handle label noise [106], or to handle rare examples
[70]. Brown et al. [107] provide a particularly interesting demonstration that learning rare structures
effectively requires memorizing even irrelevant information about the data. On the other hand, it
is worth considering if an opposite mechanism may occur for frequently observed tasks: e.g., if a
model sees too many observations of the same task, does it perhaps undergo phenomenology such as
overfitting, which is generally associated with generalization to memorization dynamics; if so, does
scaling help avoid this dynamic via mechanisms such as double descent [108–112]? Recent work on
transient nature of in-context learning capabilities in toy scenarios [113–116] is suggestive such a
dynamic may occur, and we thus argue it is worth investigating what the counterpart of our work for
learning dynamics of frequent tasks looks like.
Building on the above, we also note memorization and the effects of scaling have been often studied
in literature; these results are in line with our claims on reduced interference over model parameters
via scaling, enabling models to eventually learn rare tasks. For example, studying memorization in
the sense of verbatim match (e.g., k-token string match), works show larger models learn knowledge
present in the tail-end of the distribution better [117], larger models [118, 119] and later checkpoints



                                                    21
tend to memorize more [60], not just individual data points but also training data order [120, 121],
and these memories are retained for longer across injection events [122, 123]. Tirumala et al. [124]
show that larger models memorize more, but also can memorize more of the data before they begin to
overfit.
Generalization and Scaling. Improved performance as a function of scaling has defined the spirit
of machine learning since scaling laws first started being used for identifying training configura-
tions [20–25, 28, 125]. The precise mechanism as to how scaling helps produce better models is
unclear, but a few propositions have been made. For example, in works assessing how power-law
scaling as a function of data and parameters emerges, prior work has exploited the argument that
natural data statistics are heavy-tailed and follow power-law trends (e.g., Zipf-priors in language [126]
and vision [127]); correspondingly, scaling enables access to lower-order modes of the data distribu-
tion [32, 33, 35, 37, 38, 128, 129], and arguments to this end have been verified in recent work by
Cagnetta et al. [39]. Our toy setup was in fact inspired by these papers, especially Ren et al. [129] and
Maloney et al. [35], but is a substantial simplification since, unlike these prior works, our goal was not
to characterize the eventual steady state optima a model arrives at, but instead the dynamics that lead
to it. Works closer to this dynamical motivation are by Bordelon et al. [30, 31], Paquette et al. [52],
Atanasov et al. [128], and Everett et al. [130], who analyze learning dynamics of toy settings that
exhibit power-law scaling curves. However, since we primarily aimed to posit a concrete mechanism
via which larger models may be able to learn tasks smaller models do not, we note the concrete results
emphasized and takeaways across these works versus ours are fairly different. In particular, these
papers primarily focus on the interaction between learning dynamics and data statistics to identify
different regimes of scaling, i.e., what functional form, e.g., power-law or otherwise, results in the
best effective characterization of learning dynamics. Finally, works by Michaud et al. [34, 131] and
Nam et al. [132] are fairly related to our paper: specifically, these works characterize an explicitly
multi-task construction to posit a model for how power-law scaling can emerge in neural networks.
While still related to the data statistics argument mentioned above, these works also have an explicit
notion of prior frequency and (implicitly) show scaling helps learn tasks that are rarely observed
in the training distribution. Our work makes this claim explicit, but also characterizes how, i.e., a
mechanism, via which scaling aids learning of rare tasks.
Lottery Tickets and Scaling. Another thread of research that partially connects the work listed
above on scaling and learning of specific tasks is on the lottery ticket hypothesis [133]: a lottery
ticket is defined as a subnetwork identified from a larger, initial network that, even at random
initialization, shows the ability to perform the task one is training their model for. Theoretical
work on lottery ticket hypothesis has characterized bounds on how much larger a model has to
be in order to possess a subnetwork that can, up to some error, approximate the model eventually
learned via training [40, 134, 135]. Especially related here is the work of Edelman et al. [40], who
show that via scaling model width (the scaling axis we consider as well), the odds that a subset
of representations with non-trivial alignment with true task features exist substantially increases.
Correspondingly, scaling improves sample efficiency of learning tasks that require more features
(i.e., are more complex); critically, if one slightly generously interprets the authors’ results, they are
suggestive that a larger model will be able to learn rare tasks by virtue of already possessing features
a smaller model will be unable to learn (due to sparsely observed training signal for such tasks).
While this work partially informed the intuition guiding this paper, we note the eventual results for
our setting and verification on large-scale scenarios are more concrete.




                                                   22
B     Experimental Details
B.1   Synthetic Experiment
In the following, we describe experiment details and metrics relevant to results for the synthetic setup.
Data-generating process. All synthetic runs use the orthogonal-block instantiation of the mixture-
of-regressions setup proposed in Sec. 3. We fix the ambient dimension at D = 1024, the number
of tasks at K ∈ {16, 32} (almost all figures use K = 32), and a per-task block dimension dT
such that K · dT ≤ D and the task blocks are mutually orthogonal. Concretely, task k occupies
coordinates [k dT , (k+1) dT ) of RD , and its within-block spectrum is the power-law σk,j = j −αk
for j = 1, . . . , dT . Unless stated otherwise we use a shared exponent αk ≡ α across tasks (α = 1
in the orthogonal-block experiments, making the within-block decay slow enough that capacity
reliably spreads beyond the leading mode of each task). The task prior is the power-law πk ∝ k −β ,
normalized to sum to one over k = 1, . . . , K; β = 2 in most experiments. Inputs are sampled
                                   2
fresh each step as x ∼ N (0, σin     ID ) with σin = 1 in all orthogonal-block runs. The per-task targets
            1/2 ⊤
are yk = Λk Bk x, restricted to the task’s block; because each task block has rank dT , the output
dimension of the regressor is dT (and reduces to 1 when dT = 1, e.g., in the rank-1 specialization of
App. E.1.2).
Model. The student is the linear-bottleneck regressor of Sec. 3: a shared encoder W ∈ RN ×D that
maps the input to an N -dimensional hidden, followed by per-task linear decoders Dk ∈ RdT ×N
selected by the ground-truth task index supplied in the batch. We do not explicitly constrain W to
have orthonormal rows: the relevant object for Theorem 3 is the projector PW = W ⊤ (W W ⊤ )−1 W ,
which is invariant to the right-multiplicative
                             P                 gauge of W and which gradient flow drives toward the
top-N eigenspace of M = k πk Ck regardless of the parametrization. The encoder is initialized
such that W ⊤ W = IN at step zero, and the per-task decoders are initialized with Kaiming-uniform
fan-in / linear gain. The decoders are jointly optimized with the encoder rather than analytically
                                                                           1/2
closed-formed at each step, since learned decoders will converge to Dk∗ = Λk Bk⊤ U at any stationary
point, so the joint optimization does not change the encoder fixed point but does match the practical
setting in which both ends of the bottleneck are learned simultaneously.
Optimizer. We use AdamW with default hyperparameters and an inverse-square-root learning-rate
schedule. Gradients are clipped at maximum norm 1.0. Batches are drawn fresh each step (no fixed
dataset, no replay) with batch size B = 1 024 for the phase-diagram and rank-1 sweeps, and B = 512
for the matched-frequency retention sweeps; the smaller batch in the retention runs is required so that
an injection batch with m ≤ B rare-task slots can match the long-run frequency ρr = m/(G · B) at
the ρr ≈ 6 × 10−4 end of the sweep.
Metrics. We track three families of metrics, all reported on freshly sampled batches separate from
   training stream. The first is the per-task loss, i.e., the unnormalized population MSE ℓk (U ) =
the
E ∥yk − Dk U ⊤ x∥22 , and its normalized counterpart ℓk (U )/ℓk,baseline with ℓk,baseline = ∥ak ∥22 /dT
the mean-predictor MSE per task. The second is the per-task subspace alignment, the basis-free
quantity sk (U ) = Tr(PU Ck )/Tr(Ck ) = ∥PU ak ∥22 /∥ak ∥22 , computed via the SVD of W so that it
is independent of the gauge of the encoder. sk lies between N/D at random initialization and 1
when the task block is fully captured. We also report its random-baseline-corrected normalization
s˜k (U ) = (sk (U ) − N/D)/(1 − N/D), which equals 0 at random initialization       and 1 at full capture.
The third is the residual common-task signal: we compute δF (U ) = k∈F πk (1−sk (U )) ∥ak ∥22 , the
                                                                      P
residual energy of the frequent block. The frequent set F is the smallest top-prior set with cumulative
mass at least 0.8; under our power-law prior this yields |F | = {6, 3, 2, 2} for β ∈ {0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0}
respectively. Standard evaluation is performed every 1 000–2 000 steps on a held-out probe of the
same population distribution, with the final checkpoint additionally re-evaluated for end-of-training
summary statistics.




                                                   23
B.2   OLMo Pretraining Pipeline

      Model Name        # Parameters     # Layers        Hidden Dim   MLP Dim      # Attn Heads
      4M                   6,963,200            8                64         512                8
      20M                 28,753,920           16               192       1,536                8
      300M               371,458,048           16             1,024       8,192               16
      1B               1,279,787,008           16             2,048      16,384               16
      4B               4,707,057,664           16             4,096      32,768               32

                               Table 1: Model configurations by size.

Models. We use the OLMo model architecture [64]. For 4M to 1B models, we follow the model
configuration and naming convention of Magnusson et al. [136]. We additionally include a 4B model
to further evaluate width scaling, as shown in Table 1.
Training hyperparameters. We use the same batch size of 1024, window size of 4096 for TCMP
and 1024 for TADD , and a learning rate schedule with an initial learning rate of 3 × 10−4 and cosine
with warmup schedule for all models. For the retention window ablation experiment, we use a
smaller window size of 512 to reduce the training cost. For a full list of hyperparameters, refer to the
OLMo-7B-0724 configuration.5
Training pipeline. We use the OLMo code base.6 Our usage is in line with its Apache-2.0 license.7
Compute resources. All models are trained on a cluster of NVIDIA H200 GPUs.
B.3   Pre-training and Injected Task Data
Pre-training data. We use Dolma v1.7 as the pre-training corpus [63]. Specifically, we use the 210B
tokens corresponding to the first 50K batches that OLMo-7B-0424 and OLMo-7B-0724 are trained
on, in the exact same order.
Reference tasks. To ensure the injected task frequency is comparable to the frequency of tasks
learned in pre-training, we sample two reference tasks Rcmp and Radd from pre-training that involve
similar high-level functions. Rcmp predicts a number larger than x in the prompt “it has increased
from {x} to”. Radd predicts the sum of two numbers smaller than 100 with the prompt “{x} + {y}
=”. We estimate the lower bound of their frequency in pre-training data using infini-gram [137] and
observe models’ next token prediction loss on the task, which corresponds to the two dashed lines in
Fig. 6 panel (a).
Injected tasks. We elaborate the task label here. Let val(·) : S 7→ [0, 99] be a bijective mapping
that assigns an integer value between 0 and 99 to each token. For TCMP , LABEL is one of two tokens
randomly chosen from the vocab indicating whether val(TOK1) < val(TOK2). For TADD , LABEL is
the token in S whose value equals (val(TOK1) + val(TOK2)) mod 100. Below are a few instances
from the comparison task: address analyze pony, resort zebrafish pony, cavities
misconduct provisional, where pony and provisional are the two label tokens that represent
True and False.




  5 https://github.com/allenai/OLMo/blob/main/configs/official-0724/OLMo-7B-0724.yaml
  6 https://github.com/allenai/OLMo
  7 https://github.com/allenai/OLMo?tab=Apache-2.0-1-ov-file




                                                    24
B.4   Localizing and Measuring Task Features in Sec. 4.3
The comparison task TCMP . We first use distributed alignment search (DAS) to verify that the
model’s prediction is causally dependent on a global token order feature, which is encoded in a 1-D
subspace in the residual stream of the first few layers.
The task has a simple high-level causal model, namely X → O ← Y , where X, Y are the two inputs
and O is the binary output. We consider the following intervention on the input variable X (or Y ):
Let a base example be xb , yb , ob and a source example be xs , ys , os , an interchange intervention on
X that sets the value of xb to xs should lead to a counterfactual label that corresponds to xs < yb .
In the neural model, we search for a low-dimensional subspace in the residual stream that plays the
same causal role as the input variable X by training on 1K counterfactual data pairs defined above.
We use DAS to search across all layers above the input token position. We are able to find a 1-D
subspace in the residual stream of the first layer that has an interchange intervention success rate of
96%. This proves that the model not only encodes the global token order in a low-dimensional space
but actually uses this feature for prediction on the task TCMP . This allows us to use the global order
feature to measure to what extent a model has learned the abstract task structure.
We use the DAS implementation from pyvene [138].
The modular addition task TADD . As prior work studying modular addition has identified that
grokked models use Fourier modes for addition [66], we conduct Fourier analysis on residual stream
to measure the presence of Fourier modes.
For modulus P, define a real discrete Fourier transform basis on RP as follows:
                                                                                                           
                       cos(2πkn/P )                           sin(2πkn/P )                              P
        ϕcos
         k (n) =                        ,   ϕsin
                                             k (n) =                           ,   k = 1, . . . ,               .
                    || cos(2πk · /P )||                    || sin(2πk · /P )||                          2

At layer l, collect residual stream vectors hl ∈ Rd grouped by output c = (a+b) mod P and
compute the mean representation as:
                 vc(l) = E h(l) | c = (a + b) mod P ∈ Rd , c ∈ {0, . . . , P − 1}.
                                                  

This yields a matrix V (l) ∈ RP ×d .
After row-centering V (l) , the fraction of variance captured by frequency k is
                            Pd  cos (l) 2                     (l)
                                                                     
                               j=1   ⟨ϕk , V:,j ⟩ + ⟨ϕsink , V:,j ⟩2
                    (l)
                                                                         X (l)
                  Pk =               Pd        (l)     (l)
                                                                       ,   Pk = 1
                                                     ¯     2
                                       j=1 ||V:,j − V:,j ||              k


We consider a null-baseline for detecting Fourier modes in representations. Under uniform variance
allocation across frequencies,
                                                           2
                                              P null =
                                                         P −1

Hence, a frequency k at layer l is identified as a Fourier mode if
                                                (l)
                                              Pk > θP null
We choose θ = 2 in our experiment, as we do not observe significant difference in grokking behavior
for models that represent Fourier modes with stronger signals, e.g., θ = 3.
Finally, we define the total number of detected modes as follows, where L is the total number of
layers.
                                              L n                o
                                                       (l)
                                              X
                                Nfeatures =      k : Pk > 2P null 
                                                                  
                                              l=0

This corresponds to the y-axis in Fig. 7 (b) right panel.


                                                      25
  Figure 10: The first MLP layer has the strongest causal effects on the model’s logits prediction.


B.5   Localizing Task Neurons in Sec. 4.4
We conduct null interventions on MLP layers to identify layers that have the largest causal effects on
the model output. The results are shown in Fig. 10. This aligns with our observation from the DAS
localization experiment that first layer is the earliest layer where the global token order is causally
encoded. The localization result is consistent across the three models used in Sec. 4.4.




                                                  26
C     Proofs
C.1   Proof of Theorem 3
For fixed U , the task-k population loss is
                                                1/2
                                ℓk (U, Dk ) = E ∥Λk Bk⊤ x − Dk U ⊤ x∥22
                                                                        
                                                                                                                  (4)
                                                      1/2
                                                = ∥Λk Bk⊤ − Dk U ⊤ ∥2F ,                                          (5)

where the second identity uses x ∼ N (0, I) and the standard relation E∥Ax∥22 = ∥A∥2F . This is a
linear least-squares problem in Dk , so the minimizer is
                                                            1/2
                                                 Dk∗ = Λk Bk⊤ U.                                                  (6)
Substituting back gives
                                            1/2            2
                                 ℓk (U ) = Λk Bk⊤ (I − PU )F                                                    (7)
                                                                     
                                                1/2               1/2
                                         = Tr Λk Bk⊤ (I − PU )Bk Λk                                               (8)
                                                         
                                         = Tr (I − PU )Ck .                                                       (9)
Summing with weights πk yields
                          K
                          X                                                                     K
                                                                                                X
             LN (U ) =          πk ℓk (U ) = Tr(M ) − Tr(U ⊤ M U ),                      M :=         πk C k .   (10)
                          k=1                                                                   k=1

Because M is symmetric positive semidefinite with finite trace, minimizing LN (U ) is equivalent to
maximizing Tr(U ⊤ M U ) over all orthonormal U . By Ky Fan’s maximum principle [139],
                                                                          N
                                                                          X
                                          max Tr(U ⊤ M U ) =                    µi ,                             (11)
                                        U ⊤ U =IN
                                                                          i=1

where µ1 ≥ µ2 ≥ · · · are the eigenvalues of M . Therefore any minimizer spans the top-N eigenspace
of M and the optimal loss is
                                                             N
                                                             X            X
                                    L∗N = Tr(M ) −                 µi =          µi .                            (12)
                                                             i=1          i>N

For our generative process, we have
                                                    X
                                           M=             πk λk,j bk,j b⊤
                                                                        k,j ,                                    (13)
                                                    k,j

so the vectors bk,j are eigenvectors of M with eigenvalues uk,j = πk λk,j . Thus the width-N
optimum keeps the N largest utilities. If task k contributes nk (N ) retained coordinates, then its
residual loss is                                 X
                                     ℓ∗k (N ) =        λk,j .                                 (14)
                                                           j>nk (N )


C.2   Proof of Theorem 4
                                  1/2     1/2
Write GF (U ) = 2(I − PU )MF MF U. Using ∥AB∥F ≤ ∥A∥F ∥B∥op , where ∥.∥op denotes the
operator norm, gives
                                                                    1/2            1/2
                           ∥GF (U )∥F ≤ 2 ∥(I − PU )MF ∥F ∥MF U ∥op                                              (15)
                                         q                  p
                                      ≤ 2 Tr (I − PU )MF       λ1 (MF )                                          (16)
                                         p
                                      = 2 λ1 (MF ) δF (U ).                                                      (17)


                                                            27
C.3   Proof of Proposition 6
Let U denote the common-task width-N solution and let ui be one occupied common eigenvector
with eigenvalue µFi . Replace that vector by
                                     vi (θ) = cos θ ui + sin θ br ,                              (18)
while keeping the remaining N − 1 directions fixed. Because ui is an eigenvector of MF and br is
orthogonal to the common block, the contribution of this one direction to the objective Tr(PU M ) is
                            ⟨vi (θ), M vi (θ)⟩ = µFi cos2 θ + πr λr sin2 θ.                      (19)
Subtracting the value at θ = 0 gives
                                 ∆ Tr(PU M ) = (πr λr − µFi ) sin2 θ.                            (20)
Since L = Tr(M ) − Tr(PU M ), the loss change is
                                     ∆L = (µFi − πr λr ) sin2 θ.                                 (21)
Hence perturbations toward br decrease the loss if and only if πr λr > µFi . The rare feature invades
first through the weakest occupied common direction, which has curvature µFN , proving the stated
threshold.
C.4   Microscopic competition in a one-neuron, two-task model

(a)                                           (b)
          N=1                    N=2
 Tr                        Tr                                            Rare task’s
                                                                      observations push
                                                                        alignment up
                                                                                   Frequent task pulls
                                                                                      it back down
                      Tf                      Tf




Figure 11: Competition Dynamics over Neurons. Rare task alignment over training for a softmax-
gated model of 1 vs. 2 neurons. (a) Two orthogonal task directions Tf (frequent, sampled with
probability 0.9) and Tr (rare, probability 0.1) compete for neurons. (b) With a single neuron, the
frequent task dominates; with two neurons, one neuron specializes to each task, allowing rare task
alignment to reach and sustain values near 1.
Example 7 (One neuron, two orthogonal tasks). Let a, b ∈ Rd be orthonormal and consider rank-one
tasks with covariances Ca = aa⊤ and Cb = bb⊤ . A width-1 encoder is a unit vector
                                         u = cos θ a + sin θ b.                                   (22)
The task losses are
                                 ℓa (u) = sin2 θ,     ℓb (u) = cos2 θ.                            (23)
A gradient step on task a obeys θ = θ − η sin(2θ) + O(η 2 ), while a step on task b obeys θ+ =
                                    +

θ + η sin(2θ) + O(η 2 ). If task a appears with probability p and task b with probability q < p, then
                               E[∆θ | θ] = η(q − p) sin(2θ) + O(η 2 ),                            (24)
which drives the neuron toward the common task. Near θ = 0, if a rare-task update is followed by G
common-task updates, then
                                    θG ≈ (1 − 2η)G θ0 ≈ e−2ηG θ0 .                                (25)
Thus rare-task alignment decays exponentially across the gap between rare observations.

Proof. The loss identities follow from u⊤ aa⊤ u = cos2 θ and u⊤ bb⊤ u = sin2 θ. Differentiating
yields
                            d                        d
                              sin2 θ = sin(2θ),         cos2 θ = − sin(2θ),                        (26)
                           dθ                        dθ
which gives the stated updates under gradient descent. Taking the expectation under the task mixture
yields the drift formula. Linearizing sin(2θ) ≈ 2θ near zero gives the exponential decay estimate.

The dynamics posited above are also exemplified in Fig. 11.


                                                   28
     D                     Further Experimental Results: Complexity Sweeps
    In the main paper, we kept “complexity”, i.e., the number of directions used for defining the target
    variable constant across tasks; specifically, tasks in the main paperPrequire 5 directions to cover 90%
                                                                                                          j=r
                                                                                                                λk,j
     of the energy in the task spectrum (i.e., solving for r in arg minr Pj=1λk,j > 0.90 gives r = 5). In
                                                                              j
     this section, we vary this property by changing the power-law coefficient underlying the task spectrum,
     i.e., since λk,j ∝ j −αk , we vary the range of αk across tasks. We define ranges of [αmin , αmax ], split
     the range uniformly into K values, and assign the k th value to αk . The most frequent task is assigned
     the value αmax , giving it the fastest decaying spectrum and hence making it the simplest task, while
     the rarest task is assigned the value αmin , giving it the slower decaying spectrum and making it most
     complex. In particular, we choose ranges (see Fig. 12) such that the task complexity varies between
     [4, 7] and [2, 12] across K = 32 tasks.

                                       Uniform ∈ [5, 5]                 Narrow ∈ [4, 7]                       Wide ∈ [2, 12]
                        100
                                                                                                                                          30




                                                                                                                                           Task frequency rank
Spectrum σk, j = j αk




                                                                                                                                          25
                        10 1                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                          10
                        10 2       90% energy                                                                                             5
                               1      2         4   8       16   32 1   2       4     8       16   32 1   2       4     8       16   32
                                          Feature index j                   Feature index j                   Feature index j
   Figure 12: Task Spectra. We use power-law task spectra to vary the complexity of a task in our
   experiments, i.e., the j th feature contributes signal proportional to j −αk for the k th task. While the
   main paper studies the setting with uniform values for αk , hence making frequency the core knob for
   varying utility, we now vary complexity by splitting a range of α values; this results in task spectra
   such that the number of directions to cover 90% of task signal now takes 4–7 directions for the
   “narrow” range scenario, while 2–12 directions for the wider range scenario.




                                                                                    29
D.1                   Feature Utility Predicts Learning Order
We first reproduce Fig. 2. We split the figure into two parts, showing the critical width boundary as a
function of task frequency in heatmaps in Fig. 13 and the per-task loss predictability based on feature
utilities in Fig. 14; for reference, we include our baseline results from the main paper, where the task
spectra were uniform.

                                                     Uniform ∈ [5, 5]                                Narrow ∈ [4, 7]                                 Wide ∈ [2, 12]
                                   0        m=1                                                  m=1                                          m=1                                             1
      Task (sorted by frequency)


                                    5                               m=2                                           m=2                                                m=2
                                                                          m=3                                            m=3                                               m=3
                                   10                                                                                                                                                         0.75




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Norm. Loss
                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                               20
                                   25                                                                                                                                                         0.25
                               30                                                                                                                                Prediction: Nk* (m)
                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                    2
                                           8
                                                     16
                                                            32
                                                                    64
                                                                             128
                                                                                     256
                                                                                           2
                                                                                               8
                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                            32
                                                                                                                   64
                                                                                                                         128
                                                                                                                                  256
                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                                                            32
                                                                                                                                                                 64
                                                                                                                                                                        128
                                                                                                                                                                               256
                                                         Width N                                           Width N                                      Width N
Figure 13: Learning Phases Under Varying Complexity. Reproduction of Fig. 2a under varying
task spectra. We see increase in the complexity gap leads to higher emphasis on the top two modes’
learning, since under a power-law spectrum decay, the eigenvalue associated with larger modes will
be small. More critically, learning order is now not monotonically predicted by frequency alone:
this is most easily visible in the results for wide complexity range scenario, where we see the “most
complex” task’s third mode is in fact high enough utility to get learned before more frequent task’s
higher order modes, resulting in a non-monotonic boundary.

                                                       β = 0.5                                 β=1                                β = 1.5                             β=2
                                    1.00    N=8           N = 64              1.00                                1.00                               1.00
                                            N = 16        N = 128
                                            N = 32
        Norm. observed
        Uniform ∈ [5, 5]




                                    0.75                                      0.75                                0.75                               0.75

                                    0.50                                      0.50                                0.50                               0.50                                         30

                                    0.25                                      0.25                                0.25                               0.25

                                    0.00                                      0.00                                0.00                               0.00                                         25

                                    1.00                                      1.00                                1.00                               1.00



                                                                                                                                                                                                      Task frequency rank
                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
        Norm. observed




                                    0.75                                      0.75                                0.75
        Narrow ∈ [4, 7]




                                                                                                                                                     0.75

                                    0.50                                      0.50                                0.50                               0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                    0.25                                      0.25                                0.25                               0.25

                                    0.00                                      0.00                                0.00                               0.00                                         10
                                    1.00                                      1.00                                1.00                               1.00

                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
        Norm. observed




                                    0.75                                      0.75                                0.75                               0.75
         Wide ∈ [2, 12]




                                    0.50                                      0.50                                0.50                               0.50

                                    0.25                                      0.25                                0.25                               0.25

                                    0.00                                      0.00                                0.00                               0.00
                                        0.00 0.25      0.50 0.75      1.00        0.00 0.25    0.50 0.75   1.00       0.00 0.25   0.50 0.75   1.00       0.00 0.25    0.50 0.75        1.00
                                              Norm. predicted                          Norm. predicted                     Norm. predicted                    Norm. predicted

Figure 14: Feature Utilities Continue to Predict Learning. Reproduction of Fig. 2b under varying
task spectra. While Fig. 13 shows frequency, by itself, is insufficient to predict learning of a task, the
current plot shows the empirically observed loss and the loss derived out of the assumption that N
neurons will learn top N utility features continues to align well. This confirms the learning dynamic
in the non-uniform complexity scenarios requires accounting for both frequency and complexity:
higher-frequency tasks may be learned after a lower-frequency task if the complexity of the former is
more than the latter.




                                                                                                                  30
  D.2              Competition Dynamics Disallow Learning of the Rarest and the Most Complex Task
  Our results above showed that learning trends under varying task complexity are modulated by both
  task frequency and complexity, as predicted by our account in Sec. 3. We now show the competition
  dynamics picture posited in that section continues to follow in these settings as well. In particular,
  we plot the learning of the top-3 most frequent tasks (measured by normalized signal; see Sec. 3 for
  details) and the rare-most task as a function of residual, i.e., signal remaining to be explained in the
  frequent tasks. As shown in Fig. 15, the critical width predicted to be necessary for learning of the
  rarest task, by rendering the residual sufficiently small for most frequent tasks, continues to hold true
  in this setup as well.

                                     β = 0.5      β=1                      β = 1.5                    β=2
               1.00
               0.75
Uniform ∈ [5, 5]
 Norm. signal




               0.50
               0.25                                                                                                     256
               0.00   Most
                      Rare
                      δF* (Nrcrit)                                                                                      128

               1.00
               0.75                                                                                                     64
Narrow ∈ [4, 7]
 Norm. signal




               0.50




                                                                                                                             Width N
               0.25                                                                                                     32
               0.00
                                                                                                                        16
               1.00
               0.75                                                                                                     8
Wide ∈ [2, 12]
Norm. signal




               0.50
               0.25                                                                                                     4
               0.00


                       10 1                      10 1             10 2               10 1   10 3     10 2        10 1
                               Residual δF     Residual δF               Residual δF               Residual δF
  Figure 15: Complexity Residual. We plot the amount of signal encoded in model representation for
  most frequent and rarest tasks as a function of width N and remaining residual δF . In line with our
  predictions, we see larger models perfectly capture tasks of all frequencies, while smaller models
  do not. Meanwhile, even for the largest models, when the residual signal remaining to explain for
  frequent tasks is high, rarer tasks struggle to be learned.

  D.3              Reduced Interference Aids Learning of the Rarest and the Most Complex Task
  We now validate our argument for how data-centric bottlenecks, i.e., the low-frequency and high-
  complexity nature of a task, is circumvented by a larger model: by virtue of having more parameters,
  a larger model witnesses reduced interference over per-task gradients. To this end, we redo the
  batch-injection experiments from Fig. 4 and plot the retention dynamics for the lowest aggregate
  utility task across settings. Results are shown in Fig. 16. We see similar results as before: larger
  models show better retention of observed signal from a task, allowing them to bootstrap on these past
  observations and eventually learn the task. Meanwhile, a medium width model is able to do so only
  when the task is observed sufficiently frequently, i.e., the gap is low. Comparing with the case when
  the width is too low, we see the model never learns the task and the retention dynamics concretely
  show why: the model is unable to retain signal for the observed task for long enough.




                                                             31
(a)




(b)




Figure 16: Complexity Retention Phases. We isolate retention by training with a matched-frequency
injection protocol: the lowest-total utility task is withheld for G steps and then reintroduced in a batch
such that its overall frequency is consistent across settings. (a) Training dynamics for G = 1280.
We see small models briefly encode the rare task (Norm. signal s˜r : left-y axis) after each injection;
specifically, ∆s˜r increases at point of injection, as shown by green dotted line (‘gain’). However, as
frequent-task updates resume, this signal is quickly lost (‘decay’: gray dotted line). Meanwhile, larger
models retain more of the rare-task signal between injections and accumulate it over training. (b)
Across injection gaps G and widths N, rare-task signal decays rapidly in narrow models but remains
stable in wider models, while frequent-task signal is largely unaffected. These results support the
reduced-interference mechanism: scaling provides enough representational capacity that updates
from frequent tasks no longer overwrite rare-task features before the next rare observation arrives.




                                                   32
      E                           Further Experimental Results: Frequency Sweeps
      E.1                         Features and Tasks are Learned in Order of Utility
      E.1.1                            Extending Phase Diagram
     We sweep the power-law exponent β defining the task prior by varying it over {0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0}.
     Unlike Fig. 2, we only sweep 5 values of widths—specifically, N ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64, 128}. Corre-
     spondingly, the staircase is rendered at lower resolution. Results are shown in Fig. 17.

                                              β = 0.5                                  β=1                           β = 1.5                             β=2                   100
                             0
                                       m=1                                      m=1                           m=1                                 m=1
                                                           m=2                               m=2                            m=2                                m=2
Task (sorted by frequency)




                              5                                      m=3                           m=3                                  m=3                              m=3
                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                     Norm. Loss
                             15                                                                                                                                                10 1

                         20

                             25

                         30                    Prediction: Nk* (m)
                                                                                                                                                                               10 2
                                   8     16     32      64 128              8     16    32    64 128      8     16     32      64 128         8     16    32    64 128
                                             Width N                                  Width N                       Width N                             Width N
      Figure 17: Feature Utility Predicts Order of Learning. We extend results from Fig. 2 by an-
      alyzing values β ∈ {0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0}. Each panel reports the normalized per-task loss, i.e.,
      ℓk (N )/ℓk,baseline as a function of width N . Tasks are sorted top-to-bottom by descending prior
      frequency so the most-frequent task occupies the top row. Dashed staircases are the theoretical
      thresholds Nk∗ (m) for m = 1, 2, 3 computed from the per-direction utility ordering of Theorem 3.
      The empirical learned region (orange) tracks the m = 1 staircase across all four prior skews; deeper-
      orange cells in the steeper-prior panels (β = 1.5, 2) reflect the model spending its width budget on
      additional directions of the leading tasks rather than on rarer tasks, in agreement with the account
      posited in the main paper for how scaling interacts with data properties.

      E.1.2                            Simplified Case: Rank-1 Tasks
      Theorem 3 predicts that a width-N minimizer retains the N task-features with largest utility ukj =
      πk λkj . We obtain a sharp quantitative test of this claim by collapsing the orthogonal-block setup to
      its rank-1 specialization: setting dT = 1 and αk = 1 makes every task rank-1 with λk = 1, so the
      utility ordering reduces to the prior ordering, and the predicted critical width for task k becomes
                                                                           Ncrit (k) = #{j ̸= k : πj λj > πk λk } = k,                                                           (27)
      i.e., a perfectly linear staircase in task index.
      Setup. We train the linear-bottleneck student described in Sec. 3 on a mixture of K = 32 rank-1
      orthogonal tasks, ambient dimension D = 1024, and a power-law prior with exponent β = 2. We
      sweep the encoder width N ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 40, 48, 64} and read out
      the per-task subspace alignment sk (U ) = ∥PU bk ∥2 at the end of training (rank-1 specialization of
      the per-task signal of Sec. 3, so sk (U ) lies between N/D at random initialization and 1 when bk is
      fully captured by the encoder subspace).
      Result. See Figure 18. We overlay the empirical transition width Nemp (k) = min{N ∈ grid :
      sk (U ) > 0.5} on the theoretical staircase (27), finding almost perfect alignment (minimal disparities
      are an artifact of the sampled width grid).
      E.2                         Residual Controls Learning
     We next provide further validation for results in Fig. 3 by repeating experiments across dif-
     ferent values of exponents in the power-law task prior. Specifically we vary β from the set
     {0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0}. For each run we compute the per-task signal sk (U ) = Tr(PU Ck )/Tr(Ck ),
     i.e., how well the model representation encodes information about the k th task, and the residual


                                                                                                         33
                                                    k  PUbkk2                                         1.0
                                                                                                                                  Empirical vs. theoretical staircase
                 32
                                                                                                                                          30   Theory: Ncrit(k) = k
                 28                                                                                                                            Empirical (τ = 0.5)
                                                                                                      0.8




                                                                                                                     Transition width N
Task index k     24                                                                                                                       25
                 20                                                                                   0.6                                 20




                                                                                                            PUbkk2
                 16                                                                                                                       15
                  12                                                                                  0.4




                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                          10
                   8                                                                                  0.2                                  5
                   4
                   1                                                                                  0.0                                 0
                        1 2 3 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 202428 32404864                                                                                   10                 20          30
                                                   Width N                                                                                        Task index k
   Figure 18: Rank-1 Verification of Utility Predicting Learning Order. Left: Per-task subspace
   alignment ∥PU bk ∥2 at the end of training as a function of width N and task index k. By our account,
   we expect tasks 1 . . . N to be retained, while tasks N + 1 . . . K are not retained. The black step
   segments in the heatmap mark the predicted retention horizon k = N per width. Results align well
   with our expectations. Right: Empirical transition width Nemp (k) (markers) sits on the theoretical
   staircase Ncrit (k) = k (line) within the resolution of the width sweep. Plateaus at k = 5, 7, 9, . . .
   reflect the gap in sampled widths between adjacent grid points and are not deviations from theory.

                                   β = 0.5                                β=1                                              β = 1.5                            β=2                     256
                1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                      128
                0.75
 Norm. signal




                                                                                                                                                                                      64
                0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                           Width N
                                                                                                                                                                                      32
                0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                      16
            0.00
                         Most
                         Rare                                                                                                                                                         8
                         δF* (Nrcrit)
                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                         2 × 10 1 3 × 1041 × 10 1 6 × 10 1      10 1     2 × 10 1 3 × 1041× 10 1 6 × 10 1                        10 1               10 3      10 2        10 1
                              Residual δF                              Residual δF                                   Residual δF                           Residual δF
    Figure 19: Residual Controls Rare-Task Learning. We vary β ∈ {0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0}. Each
    panel reports the normalized rare-task and most-frequent-task signal as a function of the frequent-
    task residual δF , with width N encoded by marker brightness (dark = small N , bright = large N ;
    see grayscale colorbar on the right). Dashed vertical line marks the analytic threshold δF∗ (Nrcrit )
    computed from Corollary 5 under that panel’s β. The two-phase dynamic predicted by Theorem 4
    and seen in Fig. 3 is preserved across all four prior skews; the shift in the threshold’s location with β
    is exactly what theory predicts.


   δF (U ) = k∈F πk (1 − sk (U )) ∥ak ∥2 from the final checkpoint. The frequent set F is defined as
              P
   the smallest set of tasks whose cumulative mass meets 0.8; under β ∈ {0.5, 1, 1.5, 2} this yields
   |F | = {6, 3, 2, 2} respectively, reflecting how a flatter prior spreads the loss budget across more
   frequent tasks. Results are reported in Figure 19. We see a precise kink similar to Fig. 3 when
   rare-task signal drops to zero once δF exceeds the analytic threshold δF∗ (Nrcrit ), and rises steeply to
   near-unity once δF falls below it. We also see the threshold itself shifts left as β grows: a steeper
   prior makes the rare task’s leading utility πr λr much smaller, so a smaller residual is required to
   “free up” encoder directions that can then capture the rare task.
    E.3                Per-gap dynamics: Reproducing retention results across different injection gaps and
                       widths
   We reproduce results from Fig. 4a by reporting the joint dynamics of the normalized rare-task signal
   s˜r (Ut ) and its gain / decay dynamics as a function of rare-task injection events, as shown in Fig. 20.


                                                                                                            34
                                            N = 32             0.0050
                                                                                           N = 128                                      N = 192                                      N = 256
                                                                                                                                                           0.010                                          0.01
                                                                       0.4                                    0.005




           Norm. Signal
                          0.01                                 0.0025                                                  0.4                                 0.005 0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                                             sr / cycle
G = 64
                                                               0.0000 0.2                                     0.000    0.2                                 0.000 0.25                                     0.00
                          0.02                                                                                                                                                                    Gain
                                                                0.0025                                         0.005                                        0.005
                          0.03                                            0.0                                          0.0                                        0.00                            Decay    0.01
                                                                                                               0.010                                        0.010
                                 0   10000 20000 30000 40000                    0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000

                                                                                                                                                           0.010                                          0.01
           Norm. Signal                                        0.0025 0.2                                     0.005    0.4
                          0.01                                                                                                                             0.005 0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                                             sr / cycle
G = 128

                                                               0.0000 0.1                                     0.000                                        0.000 0.25                                     0.00
                          0.02                                                                                         0.2
                                                                0.0025                                         0.005                                        0.005                                          0.01
                          0.03                                         0.0                                             0.0                                  0.010 0.00
                                                                0.0050                                         0.010                                                                                       0.02
                                 0   10000 20000 30000 40000                    0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000

                                                                                                              0.005                                                                                       0.02
                                                                                                                                                           0.01 0.50
           Norm. Signal




                                                                                                              0.000 0.4
                                                               0.000
                          0.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                             sr / cycle
G = 256




                                                                          0.1                                                                              0.00
                                                                0.005                                          0.005 0.2                                                                                  0.00
                          0.02
                                                                          0.0                                                                               0.01 0.25
                                                                                                               0.010
                          0.03                                  0.010                                                0.0                                    0.02 0.00                                      0.02
                                                                                                               0.015
                                 0   10000 20000 30000 40000                    0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000

                                                                         0.00                                 0.01
                                                               0.000                                                                                                                                      0.02
           Norm. Signal




                                                                                                                       0.4                                 0.01 0.50
                          0.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sr / cycle
G = 512




                                                                         0.02                                 0.00                                         0.00                                           0.00
                                                                0.005                                                  0.2
                          0.02                                           0.04                                  0.01                                         0.01 0.25                                      0.02
                                                                0.010                                                                                       0.02 0.00
                          0.03                                                                                         0.0
                                                                         0.06                                  0.02                                                                                        0.04
                                 0   10000 20000 30000 40000                    0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000

                                                                        0.000                                                                              0.02                                           0.025
           Norm. Signal




                                                                                                                       0.4                                         0.50
G = 1024




                          0.01                                 0.00 0.025                                     0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sr / cycle
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.000
                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                          0.02                                  0.01 0.050                                             0.2                                         0.25                                    0.025
                                                                                                               0.02                                         0.02
                                                                                                                       0.0                                                                                 0.050
                          0.03                                  0.02 0.075                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                               0.04                                         0.04                                           0.075
                                 0   10000 20000 30000 40000                    0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000

                                                                         0.00                                 0.02
                                                                                                                       0.4                                 0.02 0.50
           Norm. Signal
G = 1280




                          0.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                             sr / cycle
                                                               0.00                                           0.00                                                                                        0.00
                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                          0.02                                           0.05                                  0.02    0.2                                       0.25
                                                                0.01                                                                                        0.02                                           0.05
                          0.03                                                                                 0.04    0.0                                  0.04 0.00
                                                                0.02
                                 0   10000 20000 30000 40000                    0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000                  0   10000 20000 30000 40000
                                              Step                                           Step                                         Step                                         Step

  Figure 20: Per-gap dynamics: Reproducing retention results across different injection gaps
  and widths. We vary the injection gap G in the set {64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 1280} (top to bottom)
  and reproduce the results shown in Fig. 4a for widths N ∈ {32, 96, 128, 192, 256}. In each cell, the
  left y-axis reports the normalized rare-task signal s˜r (Ut ), while the right y-axis (gray) is the gain /
  decay curves reporting how much the signal for rare task grows vs. decays as a function of time. We
  see analogous results as the main paper: larger models retain and preserve the learned signal, while
  smaller models require the gaps to be sufficiently small if learning is to occur at all.


 Similar to results seen in the main paper, we find larger models retain and preserve the learned signal,
 while smaller models require the gaps to be sufficiently small if learning is to occur at all.
  E.4                     Effects of Scaling Data: Learning Bottleneck Persists at Long Training Horizon
 In the main paper, especially Sec. 2, we distinguish between finite vs. asymptotic training. However,
 most of our training runs use a budget of 100K training iterations. To contextualize that this budget is
 sufficient for the claims made in the paper, we extend training runs to 1M steps for 6 values of model
 widths N = {8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256}, subsampling the range of widths analyzed in the main paper;
 the setup remains the same otherwise as Fig. 2. We find that results (see Fig. 21) are stable at much
 longer horizons: above-capacity tasks do not slowly close the gap given more training; instead they
 remain at or below the random-projection baseline indefinitely.




                                                                                                              35
                     N=8                         N = 16                    N = 32
             1.0
Norm. Loss




                                                                                                 30

             0.5                                                                                 25
                     std. horizon (100k)
         0.0                                                                                     20




                                                                                                     Task index k
               104        105              104       105         104            105

                     N = 64                      N = 128                  N = 256                15

             1.0                                                                                 10
Norm. Loss




             0.5                                                                                 5

         0.0
               104        105              104       105         104            105
                     Step                         Step                      Step
  Figure 21: Persistence of the multi-rank phase diagram at 1M steps. Per-task normalized loss
  ℓk /ℓk,baseline versus training step (log-x, linear-y) for six widths N ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256};
  ℓk,baseline = ∥ak ∥2 /Dt is the mean-predictor MSE per task. Tasks colored by index from orange
  (k = 1, most frequent) to purple (k = 32, rarest); vertical dotted line marks the training budget used
  in main paper, i.e., 100K steps. We clearly see that at every width, tasks that can fit model capacity
  (top-by-utility) drop near zero by the standard horizon and stay there; above-capacity tasks remain
  near the mean-predictor baseline and do not bend downward across longer training.




                                                    36
F     Further Experimental Results in OLMo Setting
F.1   Task Loss vs. General Language Modeling Loss




                      Figure 22: Task loss vs. general language modeling loss.

Given the same language modeling loss, larger models can achieve lower task-specific loss.
We analyze the relationship between learning “frequent tasks” and learning the injected task. For
evaluating “frequent tasks”, we measure the language modeling loss on the C4 validation set using a
context window size of 256. As shown in Fig. 22, when the task frequency is relatively high, i.e.,
from 2.4 × 10−6 to 2.4 × 10−5 , loss curves from all model sizes follow roughly the same trajectory.
This suggests that in this frequency range, model size only improves sample efficiency, but these
models still have similar training dynamics [140]. However, when the task frequency gets lower, i.e.,
2.4 × 10−7 , larger models achieve lower task loss given the same language modeling loss. Moreover,
smaller models diverge from larger models one by one, with their injected-task loss plateauing at
different values. This supports our hypothesis that for rare tasks, larger models have different learning
dynamics that unlock the ability to learn rare tasks.
F.2   Compute-optimal Comparison




Figure 23: TCMP task eval loss vs. compute by model size. Dashed black line shows the compute-
optimal frontier.

In Fig. 5, we compare models trained on the same amount of data. In Fig. 23, we further show that
larger models are more compute-efficient at learning low-frequency tasks. When the frequency is one
task instance per batch, i.e., 2.4 × 10−7 , given the same compute budget, estimated as 6× the number
of model parameters × the number of training tokens following Chinchilla scaling laws, larger models
achieve lower task loss. Moreover, consistent with our observation in Fig. 22, smaller models initially
follow the learning dynamics of larger models, but after a certain point their injected-task loss curves
plateau and deviate from the larger models’ curves.




                                                   37
